
1. Methods. 2019 Sep 4. pii: S1046-2023(18)30484-5. doi:
10.1016/j.ymeth.2019.09.003. [Epub ahead of print]

Analysis of Mammalian Native Elongating Transcript sequencing (mNET-seq)
high-throughput data.

Prudêncio P(1), Rebelo K(2), Grosso AR(3), Gonçalo Martinho R(4), Carmo-Fonseca
M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Medicina Molecular João Lobo Antunes, Faculdade de Medicina,
Universidade de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal; Center for Biomedical Research,
Universidade do Algarve. Faro, Portugal. Electronic address:
pprudencio@medicina.ulisboa.pt.
(2)Instituto de Medicina Molecular João Lobo Antunes, Faculdade de Medicina,
Universidade de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal.
(3)Instituto de Medicina Molecular João Lobo Antunes, Faculdade de Medicina,
Universidade de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal; UCIBIO, Departamento de Ciências da
Vida, Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Caparica, 
Portugal.
(4)Instituto de Medicina Molecular João Lobo Antunes, Faculdade de Medicina,
Universidade de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal; Center for Biomedical Research,
Universidade do Algarve. Faro, Portugal; iBiMED, Departamento de Ciências
Médicas, Universidade de Aveiro. Aveiro, Portugal.

Mammalian Native Elongating Transcript sequencing (mNET-seq) is a recently
developed technique that generates genome-wide profiles of nascent transcripts
associated with RNA polymerase II (Pol II) elongation complexes. The ternary
transcription complexes formed by Pol II, DNA template and nascent RNA are first 
isolated, without crosslinking, by immunoprecipitation with antibodies that
specifically recognize the different phosphorylation states of the polymerase
large subunit C-terminal domain (CTD). The coordinate of the 3' end of the RNA in
the complexes is then identified by high-throughput sequencing. The main
advantage of mNET-seq is that it provides global, bidirectional maps of Pol II
CTD phosphorylation-specific nascent transcripts and coupled RNA processing at
single nucleotide resolution. Here we describe the general pipeline to prepare
and analyse high-throughput data from mNET-seq experiments.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2019.09.003 
PMID: 31493517 


2. J Vis Exp. 2019 Jul 10;(149). doi: 10.3791/59913.

Identification of Footprints of RNA:Protein Complexes via RNA Immunoprecipitation
in Tandem Followed by Sequencing (RIPiT-Seq).

Woodward L(1), Gangras P(1), Singh G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Center for RNA Biology, The Ohio State
University.
(2)Department of Molecular Genetics, Center for RNA Biology, The Ohio State
University; singh.734@osu.edu.

RNA immunoprecipitation in tandem (RIPiT) is a method for enriching RNA
footprints of a pair of proteins within an RNA:protein (RNP) complex. RIPiT
employs two purification steps. First, immunoprecipitation of a tagged RNP
subunit is followed by mild RNase digestion and subsequent non-denaturing
affinity elution. A second immunoprecipitation of another RNP subunit allows for 
enrichment of a defined complex. Following a denaturing elution of RNAs and
proteins, the RNA footprints are converted into high-throughput DNA sequencing
libraries. Unlike the more popular ultraviolet (UV) crosslinking followed by
immunoprecipitation (CLIP) approach to enrich RBP binding sites, RIPiT is
UV-crosslinking independent. Hence RIPiT can be applied to numerous proteins
present in the RNA interactome and beyond that are essential to RNA regulation
but do not directly contact the RNA or UV-crosslink poorly to RNA. The two
purification steps in RIPiT provide an additional advantage of identifying
binding sites where a protein of interest acts in partnership with another
cofactor. The double purification strategy also serves to enhance signal by
limiting background. Here, we provide a step-wise procedure to perform RIPiT and 
to generate high-throughput sequencing libraries from isolated RNA footprints. We
also outline RIPiT's advantages and applications and discuss some of its
limitations.

DOI: 10.3791/59913 
PMCID: PMC6697088 [Available on 2020-07-10]
PMID: 31355789 


3. Methods. 2019 Jul 17. pii: S1046-2023(19)30007-6. doi:
10.1016/j.ymeth.2019.07.015. [Epub ahead of print]

Approaches to study CRISPR RNA biogenesis and the key players involved.

Behler J(1), Hess WR(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Freiburg, Faculty of Biology, Genetics and Experimental
Bioinformatics, Schänzlestr. 1, D-79104 Freiburg, Germany.
(2)University of Freiburg, Faculty of Biology, Genetics and Experimental
Bioinformatics, Schänzlestr. 1, D-79104 Freiburg, Germany; University of
Freiburg, Freiburg Institute for Advanced Studies, Albertstr. 19, D-79104
Freiburg, Germany. Electronic address: wolfgang.hess@biologie.uni-freiburg.de.

Clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR) and
CRISPR-associated (Cas) proteins provide an inheritable and adaptive immune
system against phages and foreign genetic elements in many bacteria and archaea. 
The three stages of CRISPR-Cas immunity comprise adaptation, CRISPR RNA (crRNA)
biogenesis and interference. The maturation of the pre-crRNA into mature crRNAs, 
short guide RNAs that target invading nucleic acids, is crucial for the
functionality of CRISPR-Cas defense systems. Mature crRNAs assemble with Cas
proteins into the ribonucleoprotein (RNP) effector complex and guide the Cas
nucleases to the cognate foreign DNA or RNA target. Experimental approaches to
characterize these crRNAs, the specific steps toward their maturation and the
involved factors, include RNA-seq analyses, enzyme assays, methods such as
cryo-electron microscopy, the crystallization of proteins, or UV-induced
protein-RNA crosslinking coupled to mass spectrometry analysis. Complex and
multiple interactions exist between CRISPR-cas-encoded specific riboendonucleases
such as Cas6, Cas5d and Csf5, endonucleases with dual functions in maturation and
interference such as the enzymes of the Cas12 and Cas13 families, and nucleases
belonging to the cell's degradosome such as RNase E, PNPase and RNase J, both in 
the maturation as well as in interference. The results of these studies have
yielded a picture of unprecedented diversity of sequences, enzymes and
biochemical mechanisms.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2019.07.015 
PMID: 31325492 


4. Data Brief. 2019 May 31;25:104083. doi: 10.1016/j.dib.2019.104083. eCollection
2019 Aug.

Analyses of rRNA gene chromatin in cell cycle arrested Saccharomyces cerevisiae
cells.

Paillé A(1), Charton R(1), Muguet A(1), Griesenbeck J(2), Smerdon MJ(3), Conconi 
A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Département de Microbiologie et Infectiologie, Faculté de Médecine, Université
de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC J1H 5N4, Canada.
(2)Institut für Biochemie, Genetik und Mikrobiologie, Universität Regensburg,
93053 Regensburg, Germany.
(3)Biochemistry and Biophysics, School of Molecular Biosciences, Washington State
University, Pullman, WA 99164-7520, United States.

The existence of two chromatin structures in the rDNA locus was previously
demonstrated for a large variety of organisms, ranging from yeast to human. In
yeast there are about 150-200 rRNA genes organized in tandem repeats. Almost half
of them are transcribed and largely depleted of nucleosomes (active/open), the
other half is not transcribed and is assembled in regular arrays of nucleosomes
(inactive/closed). It is proposed that RNA polymerase-I (RNAPI)
transcription-elongation removes nucleosomes from closed rRNA genes (opening),
and that soon after DNA replication there is deposition of nucleosomes on the
open rRNA genes (closing). In G1 arrested cells, nearly all rRNA genes are
depleted of nucleosomes, but most of them are not transcribed (inactive/open). In
relation to the research article by Charton et al. (Mutat. Res.), the data
presented here are on the hydroxyurea concentration-dependent inhibition of yeast
culture growth, on cell cycle arrest before completion of genome replication, and
on the opening of rRNA gene chromatin. As comparison, data are presented for
yeast arrested in the G1-phase of the cell cycle by the pheromone α-factor.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dib.2019.104083 
PMCID: PMC6595284
PMID: 31294051 


5. Mutat Res. 2019 May;815:20-29. doi: 10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2019.04.003. Epub 2019 Apr
27.

In yeast cells arrested at the early S-phase by hydroxyurea, rRNA gene promoters 
and chromatin are poised for transcription while rRNA synthesis is compromised.

Charton R(1), Muguet A(1), Griesenbeck J(2), Smerdon MJ(3), Conconi A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Département de Microbiologie et Infectiologie, Faculté de Médecine, Université
de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC J1H 5N4, Canada.
(2)Institut für Biochemie, Genetik und Mikrobiologie, Universität Regensburg,
93053 Regensburg, Germany.
(3)Biochemistry and Biophysics, School of Molecular Biosciences, Washington State
University, Pullman, WA 99164-7520, United States.
(4)Département de Microbiologie et Infectiologie, Faculté de Médecine, Université
de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC J1H 5N4, Canada. Electronic address:
antonio.conconi@usherbrooke.ca.

Hydroxyurea (HU) is an inhibitor of ribonucleotide reductase that is used as a
chemotherapeutic agent to treat a number of chronic diseases. Addition of HU to
cell cultures causes reduction of the dNTP cellular pool below levels that are
required for DNA replication. This trigger dividing cells to arrest in early
S-phase of the cell cycle. Cell division hinges on ribosome biogenesis, which is 
tightly regulated by rRNA synthesis. Remarkably, HU represses the expression of
some genes the products of which are required for rRNA maturation. To gain more
information on the cellular response to HU, we employed the yeast Saccharomyces
cerevisiae as model organism and analyzed the changing aspects of closed to open 
forms of rRNA gene chromatin during cell cycle arrest, the arrangement of RNA
polymerase-I (RNAPI) on the open genes, the presence of RNAPI
transcription-factors, transcription and rRNA maturation. The rRNA gene chromatin
structure was analyzed by psoralen crosslinking and the distribution of RNAPI was
investigated by chromatin endogenous cleavage. In HU arrested cells nearly all
rRNA genes were in the open form of chromatin, but only a portion of them was
engaged with RNAPI. Analyses by chromatin immuno-precipitation confirmed that the
overall formation of transcription pre-initiation complexes remained unchanged,
suggesting that the onset of rRNA gene activation was not significantly affected 
by HU. Moreover, the in vitro transcription run-on assay indicated that RNAPI
retained most of its transcription elongation activity. However, in HU treated
cells, we found that: (1) RNAPI accumulated next to the 5'-end of rRNA genes; (2)
considerably less rRNA filaments were observed in electron micrographs of rDNA
transcription units; and (3) rRNA maturation was compromised. It is established
that HU inhibition of ribonucleotide reductase holds back DNA replication. This
study indicates a hitherto unexplored cellular response to HU, namely altered
rRNA synthesis, which could participate to hamper cell division.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2019.04.003 
PMID: 31063901 


6. Mol Pharmacol. 2019 Jun;95(6):638-651. doi: 10.1124/mol.118.115196. Epub 2019 Apr
12.

Functional CRISPR and shRNA Screens Identify Involvement of Mitochondrial
Electron Transport in the Activation of Evofosfamide.

Hunter FW(1), Devaux JBL(2), Meng F(2), Hong CR(2), Khan A(2), Tsai P(2), Ketela 
TW(2), Sharma I(2), Kakadia PM(2), Marastoni S(2), Shalev Z(2), Hickey AJR(2),
Print CG(2), Bohlander SK(2), Hart CP(2), Wouters BG(2), Wilson WR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Auckland Cancer Society Research Centre, School of Medical Sciences, Faculty
of Medical and Health Sciences (F.W.H., C.R.H., A.K., I.S., W.R.W.), Maurice
Wilkins Centre for Molecular Biodiscovery (F.W.H., A.J.R.H., C.G.P., W.R.W.),
School of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Science (J.B.L.D., A.J.R.H.), and
Department of Molecular Medicine and Pathology, School of Medical Sciences,
Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences (P.T., P.M.K., C.G.P., S.K.B.), University
of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand; Threshold Pharmaceuticals, South San
Francisco, California (F.M., C.P.H.); Princess Margaret Genomics Centre (T.W.K.) 
and Princess Margaret Cancer Centre (S.M., Z.S., B.G.W.), University Health
Network, and Departments of Radiation Oncology (B.G.W.) and Medical Biophysics
(B.G.W.), University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
f.hunter@auckland.ac.nz.
(2)Auckland Cancer Society Research Centre, School of Medical Sciences, Faculty
of Medical and Health Sciences (F.W.H., C.R.H., A.K., I.S., W.R.W.), Maurice
Wilkins Centre for Molecular Biodiscovery (F.W.H., A.J.R.H., C.G.P., W.R.W.),
School of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Science (J.B.L.D., A.J.R.H.), and
Department of Molecular Medicine and Pathology, School of Medical Sciences,
Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences (P.T., P.M.K., C.G.P., S.K.B.), University
of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand; Threshold Pharmaceuticals, South San
Francisco, California (F.M., C.P.H.); Princess Margaret Genomics Centre (T.W.K.) 
and Princess Margaret Cancer Centre (S.M., Z.S., B.G.W.), University Health
Network, and Departments of Radiation Oncology (B.G.W.) and Medical Biophysics
(B.G.W.), University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Evofosfamide (TH-302) is a hypoxia-activated DNA-crosslinking prodrug currently
in clinical development for cancer therapy. Oxygen-sensitive activation of
evofosfamide depends on one-electron reduction, yet the reductases that catalyze 
this process in tumors are unknown. We used RNA sequencing, whole-genome CRISPR
knockout, and reductase-focused short hairpin RNA screens to interrogate
modifiers of evofosfamide activation in cancer cell lines. Involvement of
mitochondrial electron transport in the activation of evofosfamide and the
related nitroaromatic compounds EF5 and FSL-61 was investigated using 143B ρ 0 (ρ
zero) cells devoid of mitochondrial DNA and biochemical assays in UT-SCC-74B
cells. The potency of evofosfamide in 30 genetically diverse cancer cell lines
correlated with the expression of genes involved in mitochondrial electron
transfer. A whole-genome CRISPR screen in KBM-7 cells identified the DNA
damage-response factors SLX4IP, C10orf90 (FATS), and SLFN11, in addition to the
key regulator of mitochondrial function, YME1L1, and several complex I
constituents as modifiers of evofosfamide sensitivity. A reductase-focused shRNA 
screen in UT-SCC-74B cells similarly identified mitochondrial respiratory chain
factors. Surprisingly, 143B ρ 0 cells showed enhanced evofosfamide activation and
sensitivity but had global transcriptional changes, including increased
expression of nonmitochondrial flavoreductases. In UT-SCC-74B cells, evofosfamide
oxidized cytochromes a, b, and c and inhibited respiration at complexes I, II,
and IV without quenching reactive oxygen species production. Our results suggest 
that the mitochondrial electron transport chain contributes to evofosfamide
activation and that predicting evofosfamide sensitivity in patients by measuring 
the expression of canonical bioreductive enzymes such as cytochrome P450
oxidoreductase is likely to be futile.

Copyright © 2019 by The American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental
Therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1124/mol.118.115196 
PMID: 30979813 


7. Chem Commun (Camb). 2019 Apr 7;55(27):3899-3902. doi: 10.1039/c9cc01033e. Epub
2019 Mar 14.

Crosslinking catalytic hairpin assembly for high-contrast imaging of multiple
mRNAs in living cells.

Huang DJ(1), Cao T(1), Huang ZM(1), Wu Z(1), Tang LJ(1), Jiang JH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chemical Biology and Nanomedicine, State Key Laboratory of
Chemo/Bio-Sensing and Chemometrics, College of Chemistry and Chemical
Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha 410082, P. R. China. tomwu@hnu.edu.cn
jianhuijiang@hnu.edu.cn.

A novel DNA nanotetrad mediated crosslinking catalytic hairpin assembly (CCHA) is
reported to generate clumps of cross-linked mesh products for high-contrast and
simultaneous imaging of multiple mRNAs in living cells.

DOI: 10.1039/c9cc01033e 
PMID: 30869692  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Methods. 2019 Apr 15;159-160:70-81. doi: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2019.01.011. Epub 2019
Jan 24.

Biochemical methods to characterize RNA polymerase II elongation complexes.

Brooks Crickard J(1), Reese JC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Center for Eukaryotic Gene
Regulation, Penn State University, University Park, PA 16802, United States.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Center for Eukaryotic Gene
Regulation, Penn State University, University Park, PA 16802, United States.
Electronic address: Jcr8@psu.edu.

Transcription of DNA into RNA is critical for all life, and RNA polymerases are
enzymes tasked with this activity. In eukaryotes, RNA Polymerase II (RNAPII) is
responsible for transcription of all protein coding genes and many non-coding
RNAs. RNAPII carries out the remarkable feat of unwinding the stable
double-stranded DNA template, synthesizing the transcript and re-forming the
double helix behind it with great precision and speed. In vitro, RNAPII is
capable of carrying out templated RNA chain elongation in the absence of any
accessory proteins. However, in cells, the transcription of genes is influenced
by several factors, including DNA structure, chromatin, co-transcriptional
processes, and DNA binding proteins, which impede the smooth progression of
RNAPII down the template. Many transcription elongation proteins have evolved to 
mitigate the complications and barriers encountered by polymerase during
transcription. Many of these elongation factors physically interact with
components of the RNAPII elongation complex, including the growing RNA transcript
and the DNA template entering and exiting RNAPII. To better understand how
transcription elongation factors (EFs) regulate RNAPII, elegant methods are
required to probe the structure of the elongation complex. Here, we describe a
collection of biochemical assays to interrogate the structure of the RNAPII
elongation complex of Saccharomyces cerevisiae that are capable of providing
insights into the function of EFs and the elongation process.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2019.01.011 
PMCID: PMC6589136
PMID: 30684536 


9. J Mol Biol. 2019 Feb 15;431(4):696-713. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2019.01.003. Epub 2019
Jan 8.

RNA Polymerase Clamp Movement Aids Dissociation from DNA but Is Not Required for 
RNA Release at Intrinsic Terminators.

Bellecourt MJ(1), Ray-Soni A(1), Harwig A(1), Mooney RA(1), Landick R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI
53706, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI
53706, USA; Department of Bacteriology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison,
WI 53706, USA. Electronic address: landick@bact.wisc.edu.

In bacteria, disassembly of elongating transcription complexes (ECs) can occur at
intrinsic terminators in a 2- to 3-nucleotide window after transcription of
multiple kilobase pairs of DNA. Intrinsic terminators trigger pausing on weak
RNA-DNA hybrids followed by formation of a strong, GC-rich stem-loop in the RNA
exit channel of RNA polymerase (RNAP), inactivating nucleotide addition and
inducing dissociation of RNA and RNAP from DNA. Although the movements of RNA and
DNA during intrinsic termination have been studied extensively leading to
multiple models, the effects of RNAP conformational changes remain less well
defined. RNAP contains a clamp domain that closes around the nucleic acid
scaffold during transcription initiation and can be displaced by either swiveling
or opening motions. Clamp opening is proposed to promote termination by releasing
RNAP-nucleic acid contacts. We developed a cysteine crosslinking assay to
constrain clamp movements and study effects on intrinsic termination. We found
that biasing the clamp into different conformations perturbed termination
efficiency, but that perturbations were due primarily to changes in elongation
rate, not the competing rate at which ECs commit to termination. After
commitment, however, inhibiting clamp movements slowed release of DNA but not of 
RNA from the EC. We also found that restricting trigger-loop movements with the
RNAP inhibitor microcin J25 prior to commitment inhibits termination, in
agreement with a recently proposed multistate-multipath model of intrinsic
termination. Together our results support views that termination commitment and
DNA release are separate steps and that RNAP may remain associated with DNA after
termination.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2019.01.003 
PMCID: PMC6402830 [Available on 2020-02-15]
PMID: 30630008 


10. BMC Genomics. 2019 Jan 5;20(1):6. doi: 10.1186/s12864-018-5362-x.

DEBrowser: interactive differential expression analysis and visualization tool
for count data.

Kucukural A(1)(2), Yukselen O(3), Ozata DM(4), Moore MJ(4), Garber M(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics Core, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester,
MA, 01605, USA. alper.kucukural@umassmed.edu.
(2)Program in Molecular Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA, 01605, USA. alper.kucukural@umassmed.edu.
(3)Bioinformatics Core, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester,
MA, 01605, USA.
(4)RNA Therapeutics Institute, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA, 01605, USA.
(5)Bioinformatics Core, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester,
MA, 01605, USA. manuel.garber@umassmed.edu.
(6)Program in Molecular Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA, 01605, USA. manuel.garber@umassmed.edu.

BACKGROUND: Sequencing data has become a standard measure of diverse cellular
activities. For example, gene expression is accurately measured by RNA sequencing
(RNA-Seq) libraries, protein-DNA interactions are captured by chromatin
immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-Seq), protein-RNA interactions by
crosslinking immunoprecipitation sequencing (CLIP-Seq) or RNA immunoprecipitation
(RIP-Seq) sequencing, DNA accessibility by assay for transposase-accessible
chromatin (ATAC-Seq), DNase or MNase sequencing libraries. The processing of
these sequencing techniques involves library-specific approaches. However, in all
cases, once the sequencing libraries are processed, the result is a count table
specifying the estimated number of reads originating from each genomic locus.
Differential analysis to determine which loci have different cellular activity
under different conditions starts with the count table and iterates through a
cycle of data assessment, preparation and analysis. Such complex analysis often
relies on multiple programs and is therefore a challenge for those without
programming skills.
RESULTS: We developed DEBrowser as an R bioconductor project to interactively
visualize every step of the differential analysis, without programming. The
application provides a rich and interactive web based graphical user interface
built on R's shiny infrastructure. DEBrowser allows users to visualize data with 
various types of graphs that can be explored further by selecting and re-plotting
any desired subset of data. Using the visualization approaches provided, users
can determine and correct technical variations such as batch effects and
sequencing depth that affect differential analysis. We show DEBrowser's ease of
use by reproducing the analysis of two previously published data sets.
CONCLUSIONS: DEBrowser is a flexible, intuitive, web-based analysis platform that
enables an iterative and interactive analysis of count data without any
requirement of programming knowledge.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-018-5362-x 
PMCID: PMC6321710
PMID: 30611200  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Int J Biol Sci. 2018 Sep 7;14(12):1709-1714. doi: 10.7150/ijbs.27168. eCollection
2018.

Alternative polyadenylation analysis in animals and plants: newly developed
strategies for profiling, processing and validation.

Zhang Y(1), Carrion SA(1), Zhang Y(1), Zhang X(1), Zinski AL(1), Michal JJ(1),
Jiang Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences and Center for Reproductive Biology, Washington 
State University, Pullman, WA 99164-7620.

Alternative polyadenylation is an essential RNA processing event that contributes
significantly to regulation of transcriptome diversity and functional dynamics in
both animals and plants. Here we review newly developed next generation
sequencing methods for genome-wide profiling of alternative polyadenylation (APA)
sites, bioinformatics pipelines for data processing and both wet and dry
laboratory approaches for APA validation. The library construction methods
LITE-Seq (Low-Input 3'-Terminal sequencing) and PAC-seq (PolyA Click sequencing) 
tag polyA+ cDNA, while BAT-seq (BArcoded, three-prime specific sequencing) and
PAPERCLIP (Poly(A) binding Protein-mediated mRNA 3'End Retrieval by CrossLinking 
ImmunoPrecipitation) enrich polyA+ RNA. Interestingly, only WTTS-seq (Whole
Transcriptome Termini Site sequencing) targets both polyA+ RNA and polyA+ cDNA.
Varieties of bioinformatics pipelines are well established to pursue read quality
control, mapping, clustering, characterization and pathway analysis. The RHAPA
(RNase H alternative polyadenylation assay) and 3'RACE-seq (3' rapid
amplification of cDNA end sequencing) methods directly validate APA sites, while 
WTSS-seq (whole transcriptome start site sequencing), RNA-seq (RNA sequencing)
and public APA databases can serve as indirect validation methods. We hope that
these tools, pipelines and resources trigger huge waves of interest in the
research community to investigate APA events underlying physiological,
pathological and psychological changes and thus understand the information
transfer events from genome to phenome relevant to economically important traits 
in both animals and plants.

DOI: 10.7150/ijbs.27168 
PMCID: PMC6216028
PMID: 30416385  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared
that no competing interest exists.


12. Extremophiles. 2019 Jan;23(1):19-33. doi: 10.1007/s00792-018-1057-0. Epub 2018
Oct 3.

CRISPR RNA-guided DNA cleavage by reconstituted Type I-A immune effector
complexes.

Majumdar S(1), Terns MP(2)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Georgia,
Athens, GA, 30602, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Georgia,
Athens, GA, 30602, USA. mterns@uga.edu.
(3)Department of Genetics, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, 30602, USA.
mterns@uga.edu.
(4)Department of Microbiology, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, 30602, USA.
mterns@uga.edu.

Diverse CRISPR-Cas immune systems protect archaea and bacteria from viruses and
other mobile genetic elements. All CRISPR-Cas systems ultimately function by
sequence-specific destruction of invading complementary nucleic acids. However,
each CRISPR system uses compositionally distinct crRNP [CRISPR (cr) RNA/Cas
protein] immune effector complexes to recognize and destroy invasive nucleic
acids by unique molecular mechanisms. Previously, we found that Type I-A (Csa)
effector crRNPs from Pyrococcus furiosus function in vivo to eliminate invader
DNA. Here, we reconstituted functional Type I-A effector crRNPs in vitro with
recombinant Csa proteins and synthetic crRNA and characterized properties of
crRNP assembly, target DNA recognition and cleavage. Six proteins (Csa 4-1,
Cas3″, Cas3', Cas5a, Csa2, Csa5) are essential for selective target DNA binding
and cleavage. Native gel shift analysis and UV-induced RNA-protein crosslinking
demonstrate that Cas5a and Csa2 directly interact with crRNA 5' tag and guide
sequences, respectively. Mutational analysis revealed that Cas3″ is the effector 
nuclease of the complex. Together, our results indicate that DNA cleavage by Type
I-A crRNPs requires crRNA-guided and protospacer adjacent motif-dependent target 
DNA binding to unwind double-stranded DNA and expose single strands for
progressive ATP-dependent 3'-5' cleavage catalyzed by integral Cas3' helicase and
Cas3″ nuclease crRNP components.

DOI: 10.1007/s00792-018-1057-0 
PMCID: PMC6338502 [Available on 2020-01-01]
PMID: 30284045  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


13. RNA. 2018 Dec;24(12):1693-1705. doi: 10.1261/rna.067249.118. Epub 2018 Sep 27.

The DEAD-box protein Dbp2p is linked to noncoding RNAs, the helicase Sen1p, and
R-loops.

Tedeschi FA(1), Cloutier SC(2), Tran EJ(2), Jankowsky E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for RNA Science and Therapeutics, School of Medicine, Case Western
Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio 44106, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907, 
USA.

The DEAD-box RNA helicase Dbp2p is highly conserved in eukaryotes and has been
implicated in transcription, ribosome biogenesis, mRNP assembly, nuclear export, 
and long noncoding RNA (lncRNA) function. It is not understood how Dbp2p performs
these seemingly unrelated biological roles. An important step toward addressing
this question is the determination of cellular RNA binding sites of Dbp2p. Here, 
we identify transcriptome-wide RNA binding sites of Dbp2p from Saccharomyces
cerevisiae using UV-crosslinking, denaturing tandem affinity purification, and
next generation sequencing. We find that Dbp2p crosslinks to mRNAs and ribosomal 
RNAs, and markedly to noncoding RNAs, including snoRNA, snRNAs, and tRNAs. In
snoRNAs, Dbp2p preferentially crosslinks at sites near the 3' ends. These sites
coincide with regions where RNA-DNA hybrids (R-loops) form and with binding sites
of Sen1p, another RNA helicase that functions in transcription termination and 3'
processing of noncoding RNAs. We show that Dbp2p interacts in an RNA-independent 
manner with Sen1p in vivo. Dbp2p crosslinks to tRNAs and other RNAs also at sites
where R-loops form. Collectively, our data link Dbp2p to noncoding RNAs, Sen1p,
and R-loops. The transcriptome-wide connection to R-loops provides a unifying
theme for diverse cellular roles of Dbp2p.

© 2018 Tedeschi et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press for the 
RNA Society.

DOI: 10.1261/rna.067249.118 
PMCID: PMC6239179 [Available on 2019-12-01]
PMID: 30262458  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Chembiochem. 2018 Nov 2;19(21):2257-2261. doi: 10.1002/cbic.201800384. Epub 2018 
Oct 15.

Ultra-acceleration of Photochemical Cytosine Deamination by Using a
5'-Phosphate-Substituted Oligodeoxyribonucleotide Probe Containing a
3-Cyanovinylcarbazole Nucleotide at Its 5'-End.

Sethi S(1), Honda N(1), Wan L(1), Nakamura S(1), Fujimoto K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Asahi-dai 1-1, Nomi,
Ishikawa, 923-1292, Japan.

Genes are the blueprints for the architectures of living organisms, providing the
backbone of the information required for formation of proteins. Changes in genes 
lead to disorders, and these disorders could be rectified by reversing the
mutations that caused them. Photochemical methods currently in use for
site-directed mutagenesis employ the photoactive 3-cyanovinylcarbazole (CNV K)
nucleotide incorporated in the oligodeoxyribonucleotide (ODN) backbone. The major
drawback of this method, the requirement for high temperature, has been
addressed, and deamination has previously been achieved at 37 °C but with low
efficiency. Here, efficient deamination has been accomplished under physiological
conditions by using a short complementary photoactive ODN with a 5'-phosphate
group in the -1 position with respect to the target cytosine. It is hypothesized 
that the free phosphate group affects the microenvironment around the target
cytosine by activating the incoming nucleophile through hydrogen bonding with the
water molecule, thus facilitating nucleophilic attack on the cytosine C-4 carbon.
The degree of deamination observed in this technique is high and the effect of
the phosphate group is to accelerate the deamination reaction.

© 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/cbic.201800384 
PMID: 30195263  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


15. PLoS One. 2018 Sep 7;13(9):e0203608. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0203608.
eCollection 2018.

Impact of storage conditions on the quality of nucleic acids in paraffin embedded
tissues.

Groelz D(1), Viertler C(2), Pabst D(2), Dettmann N(1), Zatloukal K(2).

Author information: 
(1)QIAGEN GmbH, Research and Development, Hilden, Germany.
(2)Institute of Pathology, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria.

RNA and DNA analyses from paraffin-embedded tissues (PET) are an important
diagnostic tool for characterization of a disease, exploring biomarkers and
treatment options. Since nucleic acids from formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded 
(FFPE) tissue are of limited use for molecular analyses due to chemical
modifications of biomolecules alternate, formalin-free fixation reagents such as 
the PAXgene Tissue system are of evolving interest. Furthermore, biomedical
research and biomarker development critically relies on using long-term stored
PET from medical archives or biobanks to correlate molecular features with
long-term disease outcomes. We therefore performed a comparative study to
evaluate the effect of long term storage of FFPE and PAXgene Tissue-fixed and
paraffin-embedded (PFPE) tissue at different temperatures on nucleic acid
stability and usability in PCR. Matched FFPE and PFPE human tissues from routine 
clinical setting or rat tissues from a highly controlled animal model were stored
at room temperature and 4°C, as well as in case of animal tissues frozen at -20°C
and -80°C. RNA and DNA were extracted in intervals for up to nine years, and
examined for integrity, and usability in quantitative RT-PCR (RT-qPCR) or PCR
(qPCR) assays. PET storage at room temperature led to a degradation of nucleic
acids which was slowed down by storage at 4°C and prevented by storage at -20°C
or -80°C. Degradation was associated with an amplicon length depending decrease
of RT-qPCR and qPCR efficiency. Storage at 4°C improved amplifiability in RT-qPCR
and qPCR profoundly. Chemically unmodified nucleic acids from PFPE tissue
performed superior compared to FFPE tissue, regardless of storage time and
temperature in both human and rat tissues. In conclusion molecular analyses from 
PET can be greatly improved by using a non-crosslinking fixative and storage at
lower temperatures such as 4°C, which should be considered in prospective
clinical studies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0203608 
PMCID: PMC6128582
PMID: 30192857  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have read the journal's policy and
the authors of this manuscript have the following competing interests: Commercial
funder is QIAGEN. Daniel Grölz and Nadine Dettmann are employed and paid by
QIAGEN GmbH (Hilden, Germany) and have stock options or bond holdings in the
company´s pension plan. The PAXgene Tissue fixative was developed by
QIAGEN/PreAnalytiX and evaluated within the EU FP7 SPIDIA consortium. Components 
of the PAXgene Tissue System including container and kits are commercially
available by QIAGEN. Daniel Grölz is listed in the respective patent as the main 
inventor of the PAXgene Tissue technology. This does not alter the authors'
adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.


16. JCI Insight. 2018 Aug 23;3(16). pii: 122204. doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.122204.
eCollection 2018 Aug 23.

Evofosfamide for the treatment of human papillomavirus-negative head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma.

Jamieson SM(1)(2)(3), Tsai P(4), Kondratyev MK(5), Budhani P(6), Liu A(6), Senzer
NN(7), Chiorean EG(8)(9), Jalal SI(8), Nemunaitis JJ(10), Kee D(11), Shome A(1), 
Wong WW(1), Li D(1), Poonawala-Lohani N(12), Kakadia PM(4), Knowlton NS(2)(4),
Lynch CR(1), Hong CR(1), Lee TW(1)(2), Grénman RA(13), Caporiccio L(5), McKee
TD(14), Zaidi M(5)(14), Butt S(14), Macann AM(15), McIvor NP(16), Chaplin JM(16),
Hicks KO(1)(2), Bohlander SK(2)(4), Wouters BG(5)(17)(18), Hart CP(19), Print
CG(2)(4), Wilson WR(1)(2), Curran MA(6), Hunter FW(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Auckland Cancer Society Research Centre, University of Auckland, Auckland, New
Zealand.
(2)Maurice Wilkins Centre for Molecular Biodiscovery, University of Auckland,
Auckland, New Zealand.
(3)Department of Pharmacology and Clinical Pharmacology, University of Auckland, 
Auckland, New Zealand.
(4)Department of Molecular Medicine and Pathology, University of Auckland,
Auckland, New Zealand.
(5)Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.
(6)Department of Immunology, University of Texas, MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas, USA.
(7)Mary Crowley Cancer Research Center, Dallas, Texas, USA.
(8)Indiana University Melvin and Bren Simon Cancer Center, Indiana University,
Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.
(9)Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, University of Washington, Seattle,
Washington, USA.
(10)Department of Medicine, University of Toledo College of Medicine and Life
Sciences, University of Toledo, Toledo, Ohio, USA.
(11)LabPLUS, Auckland City Hospital, Auckland, New Zealand.
(12)The Bioinformatics Institute, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
(13)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Turku University
Hospital, Turku, Finland.
(14)STTARR Innovation Centre, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.
(15)Department of Radiation Oncology, Auckland City Hospital, Auckland, New
Zealand.
(16)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Auckland City Hospital,
Auckland, New Zealand.
(17)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.
(18)Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.
(19)Threshold Pharmaceuticals, South San Francisco, California, USA.

Evofosfamide (TH-302) is a clinical-stage hypoxia-activated prodrug of a
DNA-crosslinking nitrogen mustard that has potential utility for human
papillomavirus (HPV) negative head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), in
which tumor hypoxia limits treatment outcome. We report the preclinical efficacy,
target engagement, preliminary predictive biomarkers and initial clinical
activity of evofosfamide for HPV-negative HNSCC. Evofosfamide was assessed in 22 
genomically characterized cell lines and 7 cell line-derived xenograft (CDX),
patient-derived xenograft (PDX), orthotopic, and syngeneic tumor models.
Biomarker analysis used RNA sequencing, whole-exome sequencing, and whole-genome 
CRISPR knockout screens. Five advanced/metastatic HNSCC patients received
evofosfamide monotherapy (480 mg/m2 qw × 3 each month) in a phase 2 study.
Evofosfamide was potent and highly selective for hypoxic HNSCC cells.
Proliferative rate was a predominant evofosfamide sensitivity determinant and a
proliferation metagene correlated with activity in CDX models. Evofosfamide
showed efficacy as monotherapy and with radiotherapy in PDX models, augmented
CTLA-4 blockade in syngeneic tumors, and reduced hypoxia in nodes disseminated
from an orthotopic model. Of 5 advanced HNSCC patients treated with evofosfamide,
2 showed partial responses while 3 had stable disease. In conclusion,
evofosfamide shows promising efficacy in aggressive HPV-negative HNSCC, with
predictive biomarkers in development to support further clinical evaluation in
this indication.

DOI: 10.1172/jci.insight.122204 
PMCID: PMC6141174
PMID: 30135316 


17. Nucleic Acids Res. 2018 Nov 2;46(19):10066-10081. doi: 10.1093/nar/gky699.

Displacement of the transcription factor B reader domain during transcription
initiation.

Dexl S(1), Reichelt R(1), Kraatz K(1), Schulz S(1), Grohmann D(1), Bartlett M(2),
Thomm M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Archaea Center, University of Regensburg, 93053
Regensburg, Germany.
(2)Department of Biology, Portland State University, Portland, OR 972707-0751,
USA.

Transcription initiation by archaeal RNA polymerase (RNAP) and eukaryotic RNAP II
requires the general transcription factor (TF) B/ IIB. Structural analyses of
eukaryotic transcription initiation complexes locate the B-reader domain of TFIIB
in close proximity to the active site of RNAP II. Here, we present the first
crosslinking mapping data that describe the dynamic transitions of an archaeal
TFB to provide evidence for structural rearrangements within the transcription
complex during transition from initiation to early elongation phase of
transcription. Using a highly specific UV-inducible crosslinking system based on 
the unnatural amino acid para-benzoyl-phenylalanine allowed us to analyze
contacts of the Pyrococcus furiosus TFB B-reader domain with site-specific
radiolabeled DNA templates in preinitiation and initially transcribing complexes.
Crosslink reactions at different initiation steps demonstrate interactions of TFB
with DNA at registers +6 to +14, and reduced contacts at +15, with structural
transitions of the B-reader domain detected at register +10. Our data suggest
that the B-reader domain of TFB interacts with nascent RNA at register +6 and +8 
and it is displaced from the transcribed-strand during the transition from +9 to 
+10, followed by the collapse of the transcription bubble and release of TFB from
register +15 onwards.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gky699 
PMCID: PMC6212726
PMID: 30102372  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Nat Commun. 2018 Aug 3;9(1):3068. doi: 10.1038/s41467-018-05539-0.

A widespread alternate form of cap-dependent mRNA translation initiation.

de la Parra C(1)(2), Ernlund A(1), Alard A(1), Ruggles K(3), Ueberheide B(4),
Schneider RJ(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, NYU School of Medicine, New York, NY, 10016, USA.
(2)Perlmutter Cancer Center, NYU School of Medicine, New York, NY, 10016, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, NYU School of Medicine, New York, NY, 10016, USA.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, NYU School of Medicine,
New York, NY, 10016, USA.
(5)Department of Microbiology, NYU School of Medicine, New York, NY, 10016, USA. 
robert.schneider@nyumc.org.
(6)Perlmutter Cancer Center, NYU School of Medicine, New York, NY, 10016, USA.
robert.schneider@nyumc.org.

Translation initiation of most mammalian mRNAs is mediated by a 5' cap structure 
that binds eukaryotic initiation factor 4E (eIF4E). However, inactivation of
eIF4E does not impair translation of many capped mRNAs, suggesting an unknown
alternate mechanism may exist for cap-dependent but eIF4E-independent
translation. We show that DAP5, an eIF4GI homolog that lacks eIF4E binding,
utilizes eIF3d to facilitate cap-dependent translation of approximately 20% of
mRNAs. Genome-wide transcriptomic and translatomic analyses indicate that DAP5 is
required for translation of many transcription factors and receptor capped mRNAs 
and their mRNA targets involved in cell survival, motility, DNA repair and
translation initiation, among other mRNAs. Mass spectrometry and crosslinking
studies demonstrate that eIF3d is a direct binding partner of DAP5. In vitro
translation and ribosome complex studies demonstrate that DAP5 and eIF3d are both
essential for eIF4E-independent capped-mRNA translation. These studies disclose a
widespread and previously unknown mechanism for cap-dependent mRNA translation by
DAP5-eIF3d complexes.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05539-0 
PMCID: PMC6076257
PMID: 30076308  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Expert Rev Mol Diagn. 2018 Sep;18(9):767-773. doi: 10.1080/14737159.2018.1503950.
Epub 2018 Jul 27.

Gold nanoprobe-based non-crosslinking hybridization for molecular diagnostics: an
update.

Baptista PV(1).

Author information: 
(1)a UCIBIO, Department of Life Sciences, Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia ,
Universidade NOVA de Lisboa , Caparica , Portugal.

INTRODUCTION: An update on the uses and applications of the non-cross-linking
(NCL) hybridization assay based on the spectral modulation of gold nanoparticles 
(AuNPs) are presented, emphasizing DNA and RNA detection. Areas covered:
Nanotechnology is strongly impacting the way we address diagnostics and
therapeutics. In fact, nanoscale devices and particles have been used in a
variety of platforms for improved biosensing and, more interestingly, for
molecular diagnostics. AuNPs have been used in a great diversity of DNA and RNA
detection strategies that are based on their nanoscale properties. Their unique
optical properties have put them at the forefront of colorimetric sensing
platforms. Among these, those relying on the NCL mechanism using DNA-modified
AuNPs have shown remarkable versatility and simplicity for molecular detection of
human pathogens, identification of single base alterations at the basis of human 
disease, gene expression, among others. Application of the NCL assay to molecular
diagnostics will be discussed considering the challenges for validation and
clinically relevant targets. Expert commentary: Integration of the NCL approach
using AuNPs into chip biosensing platforms, projecting miniaturization and
portability, will be addressed in terms of the future, i.e. clinical validation
and translation to market.

DOI: 10.1080/14737159.2018.1503950 
PMID: 30037279  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Front Mol Biosci. 2018 Jun 8;5:52. doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2018.00052. eCollection
2018.

HMGA1a Induces Alternative Splicing of the Estrogen Receptor-αlpha Gene by
Trapping U1 snRNP to an Upstream Pseudo-5' Splice Site.

Ohe K(1), Miyajima S(2), Tanaka T(3), Hamaguchi Y(3), Harada Y(1), Horita Y(1),
Beppu Y(1), Ito F(1), Yamasaki T(1), Terai H(1), Mori M(1), Murata Y(1), Tanabe
M(3), Abe I(4), Ashida K(5), Kobayashi K(4), Enjoji M(1), Nomiyama T(3), Yanase
T(3), Harada N(6), Utsumi T(2), Mayeda A(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacotherapeutics, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Fukuoka University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(2)Department of Breast Surgery, Fujita Health University, Toyoake, Japan.
(3)Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes Mellitus, Faculty of Medicine,
Fukuoka University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(4)Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes Mellitus, Fukuoka University Chikushi
Hospital, Chikushino, Japan.
(5)Department of Medicine and Bioregulatory Science, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(6)Department of Biochemistry, Fujita Health University, Toyoake, Japan.
(7)Division of Gene Expression Mechanism, Institute for Comprehensive Medical
Science, Fujita Health University, Toyoake, Japan.

Objectives: The high-mobility group A protein 1a (HMGA1a) protein is known as a
transcription factor that binds to DNA, but recent studies have shown it exerts
novel functions through RNA-binding. We were prompted to decipher the mechanism
of HMGA1a-induced alternative splicing of the estrogen receptor alpha (ERα) that 
we recently reported would alter tamoxifen sensitivity in MCF-7 TAMR1 cells.
Methods: Endogenous expression of full length ERα66 and its isoform ERα46 were
evaluated in MCF-7 breast cancer cells by transient expression of HMGA1a and an
RNA decoy (2'-O-methylated RNA of the HMGA1a RNA-binding site) that binds to
HMGA1a. RNA-binding of HMGA1a was checked by RNA-EMSA. In vitro splicing assay
was performed to check the direct involvement of HMGA1a in splicing regulation.
RNA-EMSA assay in the presence of purified U1 snRNP was performed with psoralen
UV crosslinking to check complex formation of HMGA1a-U1 snRNP at the upstream
pseudo-5' splice site of exon 1. Results: HMGA1a induced exon skipping of a
shortened exon 1 of ERα in in vitro splicing assays that was blocked by the
HMGA1a RNA decoy and sequence-specific RNA-binding was confirmed by RNA-EMSA.
RNA-EMSA combined with psoralen UV crosslinking showed that HMGA1a trapped
purified U1 snRNP at the upstream pseudo-5' splice site. Conclusions: Regulation 
of ERα alternative splicing by an HMGA1a-trapped U1 snRNP complex at the upstream
5' splice site of exon 1 offers novel insight on 5' splice site regulation by U1 
snRNP as well as a promising target in breast cancer therapy where alternative
splicing of ERα is involved.

DOI: 10.3389/fmolb.2018.00052 
PMCID: PMC6002489
PMID: 29938207 


21. PLoS One. 2018 Jun 1;13(6):e0198480. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0198480.
eCollection 2018.

Variable termination sites of DNA polymerases encountering a DNA-protein
cross-link.

Yudkina AV(1)(2), Dvornikova AP(1), Zharkov DO(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genome and Protein Engineering, Institute of Chemical Biology
and Fundamental Medicine, Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences,
Novosibirsk, Russia.
(2)Department of Natural Sciences, Novosibirsk State University, Novosibirsk,
Russia.

DNA-protein cross-links (DPCs) are important DNA lesions induced by endogenous
crosslinking agents such as formaldehyde or acetaldehyde, as well as ionizing
radiation, cancer chemotherapeutic drugs, and abortive action of some enzymes.
Due to their very bulky nature, they are expected to interfere with DNA and RNA
synthesis and DNA repair. DPCs are highly genotoxic and the ability of cells to
deal with them is relevant for many chemotherapeutic interventions. However,
interactions of DNA polymerases with DPCs have been poorly studied due to the
lack of a convenient experimental model. We have used NaBH4-induced trapping of
E. coli formamidopyrimidine-DNA glycosylase with DNA to construct model DNA
polymerase substrates containing a DPC in single-stranded template, or in the
template strand of double-stranded DNA, or in the non-template (displaced) strand
of double-stranded DNA. Nine DNA polymerases belonging to families A, B, X, and Y
were studied with respect to their behavior upon encountering a DPC: Klenow
fragment of E. coli DNA polymerase I, Thermus aquaticus DNA polymerase I,
Pyrococcus furiosus DNA polymerase, Sulfolobus solfataricus DNA polymerase IV,
human DNA polymerases β, κ and λ, and DNA polymerases from bacteriophages T4 and 
RB69. Although none were able to fully bypass DPCs in any context, Family B DNA
polymerases (T4, RB69) and Family Y DNA polymerase IV were able to elongate the
primer up to the site of the cross-link if a DPC was located in single-stranded
template or in the displaced strand. In other cases, DNA synthesis stopped 4-5
nucleotides before the site of the cross-link in single-stranded template or in
double-stranded DNA if the polymerases could displace the downstream strand. We
suggest that termination of DNA polymerases on a DPC is mostly due to the
unrelieved conformational strain experienced by the enzyme when pressing against 
the cross-linked protein molecule.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0198480 
PMCID: PMC5983568
PMID: 29856874  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.


22. Liver Int. 2018 Sep;38(9):1664-1675. doi: 10.1111/liv.13879. Epub 2018 May 25.

Bone morphogenetic protein 9 as a key regulator of liver progenitor cells in
DDC-induced cholestatic liver injury.

Addante A(1), Roncero C(1), Almalé L(1), Lazcanoiturburu N(1), García-Álvaro
M(1), Fernández M(1), Sanz J(2), Hammad S(3), Nwosu ZC(3), Lee SJ(4), Fabregat
I(5), Dooley S(3), Ten Dijke P(6), Herrera B(1), Sánchez A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmacy, Department Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Complutense University of Madrid, Health Research Institute of the Hospital
Clínico San Carlos, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Department Pathology, Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Medical Faculty Mannheim, Department Medicine II, Heidelberg University,
Manhheim, Germany.
(4)Department Molecular Biology and Genetics, Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(5)Bellvitge Biomedical Research Institute, L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona,
Spain.
(6)Department Cell and Chemical Biology and Oncode Institute, Leiden University
Medical Center, RC, Leiden, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Liver Int. 2018 Sep;38(9):1547-1549.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Bone morphogenetic protein 9 (BMP9) interferes with liver
regeneration upon acute injury, while promoting fibrosis upon carbon
tetrachloride-induced chronic injury. We have now addressed the role of BMP9 in
3,5 diethoxicarbonyl-1,4 dihydrocollidine (DDC)-induced cholestatic liver injury,
a model of liver regeneration mediated by hepatic progenitor cell (known as oval 
cell), exemplified as ductular reaction and oval cell expansion.
METHODS: WT and BMP9KO mice were submitted to DDC diet. Livers were examined for 
liver injury, fibrosis, inflammation and oval cell expansion by serum
biochemistry, histology, RT-qPCR and western blot. BMP9 signalling and effects in
oval cells were studied in vitro using western blot and transcriptional assays,
plus functional assays of DNA synthesis, cell viability and apoptosis.
Crosslinking assays and short hairpin RNA approaches were used to identify the
receptors mediating BMP9 effects.
RESULTS: Deletion of BMP9 reduces liver damage and fibrosis, but enhances
inflammation upon DDC feeding. Molecularly, absence of BMP9 results in
overactivation of PI3K/AKT, ERK-MAPKs and c-Met signalling pathways, which
together with an enhanced ductular reaction and oval cell expansion evidence an
improved regenerative response and decreased damage in response to DDC feeding.
Importantly, BMP9 directly targets oval cells, it activates SMAD1,5,8, decreases 
cell growth and promotes apoptosis, effects that are mediated by Activin
Receptor-Like Kinase 2 (ALK2) type I receptor.
CONCLUSIONS: We identify BMP9 as a negative regulator of oval cell expansion in
cholestatic injury, its deletion enhancing liver regeneration. Likewise, our work
further supports BMP9 as an attractive therapeutic target for chronic liver
diseases.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/liv.13879 
PMCID: PMC6693351
PMID: 29751359  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Front Mol Biosci. 2018 Apr 4;5:27. doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2018.00027. eCollection
2018.

Distinct and Modular Organization of Protein Interacting Sites in Long Non-coding
RNAs.

Jalali S(1)(2), Gandhi S(1), Scaria V(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)GN Ramachandran Knowledge Center for Genome Informatics, CSIR Institute of
Genomics and Integrative Biology, New Delhi, India.
(2)CSIR Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology, Academy of Scientific and 
Innovative Research, New Delhi, India.

Background: Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs), are being reported to be extensively 
involved in diverse regulatory roles and have exhibited numerous disease
associations. LncRNAs modulate their function through interaction with other
biomolecules in the cell including DNA, RNA, and proteins. The availability of
genome-scale experimental datasets of RNA binding proteins (RBP) motivated us to 
understand the role of lncRNAs in terms of its interactions with these proteins. 
In the current report, we demonstrate a comprehensive study of interactions
between RBP and lncRNAs at a transcriptome scale through extensive analysis of
the crosslinking and immunoprecipitation (CLIP) experimental datasets available
for 70 RNA binding proteins. Results: Our analysis suggests that density of
interaction sites for these proteins was significantly higher for specific
sub-classes of lncRNAs when compared to protein-coding transcripts. We also
observe a positional preference of these RBPs across lncRNA and protein coding
transcripts in addition to a significant co-occurrence of RBPs having similar
functions, suggesting a modular organization of these elements across lncRNAs.
Conclusion: The significant enrichment of RBP sites across some lncRNA classes is
suggestive that these interactions might be important in understanding the
functional role of lncRNA. We observed a significant enrichment of RBPs which are
involved in functional roles such as silencing, splicing, mRNA processing, and
transport, indicating the potential participation of lncRNAs in such processes.

DOI: 10.3389/fmolb.2018.00027 
PMCID: PMC5893854
PMID: 29670884 


24. PLoS Genet. 2018 Mar 22;14(3):e1007278. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1007278.
eCollection 2018 Mar.

The RNA-binding protein Celf1 post-transcriptionally regulates p27Kip1 and
Dnase2b to control fiber cell nuclear degradation in lens development.

Siddam AD(1), Gautier-Courteille C(2), Perez-Campos L(3)(4), Anand D(1), Kakrana 
A(5), Dang CA(1), Legagneux V(2), Méreau A(2), Viet J(2), Gross JM(4)(6),
Paillard L(2), Lachke SA(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Delaware, Newark, DE, United 
States of America.
(2)Institut de Génétique et Développement de Rennes, Université de Rennes 1, CNRS
UMR6290, Rennes, France.
(3)Instituto Tecnológico de Costa Rica, Cartago, Costa Rica.
(4)Department of Molecular Biosciences, University of Texas, Austin, TX, United
States of America.
(5)Center for Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, University of Delaware,
Newark, DE, United States of America.
(6)Department of Ophthalmology, Louis J. Fox Center for Vision Restoration,
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, United States of
America.

Opacification of the ocular lens, termed cataract, is a common cause of
blindness. To become transparent, lens fiber cells undergo degradation of their
organelles, including their nuclei, presenting a fundamental question: does
signaling/transcription sufficiently explain differentiation of cells progressing
toward compromised transcriptional potential? We report that a conserved
RNA-binding protein Celf1 post-transcriptionally controls key genes to regulate
lens fiber cell differentiation. Celf1-targeted knockout mice and celf1-knockdown
zebrafish and Xenopus morphants have severe eye defects/cataract. Celf1
spatiotemporally down-regulates the cyclin-dependent kinase (Cdk) inhibitor
p27Kip1 by interacting with its 5' UTR and mediating translation inhibition.
Celf1 deficiency causes ectopic up-regulation of p21Cip1. Further, Celf1 directly
binds to the mRNA of the nuclease Dnase2b to maintain its high levels. Together
these events are necessary for Cdk1-mediated lamin A/C phosphorylation to
initiate nuclear envelope breakdown and DNA degradation in fiber cells. Moreover,
Celf1 controls alternative splicing of the membrane-organization factor
beta-spectrin and regulates F-actin-crosslinking factor Actn2 mRNA levels,
thereby controlling fiber cell morphology. Thus, we illustrate new
Celf1-regulated molecular mechanisms in lens development, suggesting that
post-transcriptional regulatory RNA-binding proteins have evolved conserved
functions to control vertebrate oculogenesis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1007278 
PMCID: PMC5889275
PMID: 29565969  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Mol Cell. 2018 Mar 15;69(6):979-992.e6. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2018.02.022.

Prp19/Pso4 Is an Autoinhibited Ubiquitin Ligase Activated by Stepwise Assembly of
Three Splicing Factors.

de Moura TR(1), Mozaffari-Jovin S(2), Szabó CZK(1), Schmitzová J(1), Dybkov O(3),
Cretu C(1), Kachala M(4), Svergun D(5), Urlaub H(6), Lührmann R(3), Pena V(7).

Author information: 
(1)Macromolecular Crystallography Group, Max Planck Institute for Biophysical
Chemistry, Am Fassberg 11, 37077 Göttingen, Germany.
(2)Department of Cellular Biochemistry, Max Planck Institute for Biophysical
Chemistry, Am Fassberg 11, 37077 Göttingen, Germany. Electronic address:
smozaff@mpibpc.mpg.de.
(3)Department of Cellular Biochemistry, Max Planck Institute for Biophysical
Chemistry, Am Fassberg 11, 37077 Göttingen, Germany.
(4)Bayer, Düsseldorferstr. 500, Geb. 151, 51061 Köln, Germany; Biological Small
Angle Scattering, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Notkestr. 85, Geb. 25a, 
22607 Hamburg, Germany.
(5)Biological Small Angle Scattering, European Molecular Biology Laboratory,
Notkestr. 85, Geb. 25a, 22607 Hamburg, Germany.
(6)Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group, Max Planck Institute for Biophysical
Chemistry, Am Fassberg 11, 37077 Göttingen, Germany; Bioanalytics Group,
Institute for Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Göttingen,
Robert-Koch-Str. 40, 37075 Göttingen, Germany.
(7)Macromolecular Crystallography Group, Max Planck Institute for Biophysical
Chemistry, Am Fassberg 11, 37077 Göttingen, Germany. Electronic address:
vlad.pena@mpibpc.mpg.de.

Human nineteen complex (NTC) acts as a multimeric E3 ubiquitin ligase in DNA
repair and splicing. The transfer of ubiquitin is mediated by Prp19-a
homotetrameric component of NTC whose elongated coiled coils serve as an assembly
axis for two other proteins called SPF27 and CDC5L. We find that Prp19 is
inactive on its own and have elucidated the structural basis of its
autoinhibition by crystallography and mutational analysis. Formation of the NTC
core by stepwise assembly of SPF27, CDC5L, and PLRG1 onto the Prp19 tetramer
enables ubiquitin ligation. Protein-protein crosslinking of NTC, functional
assays in vitro, and assessment of its role in DNA damage response provide
mechanistic insight into the organization of the NTC core and the communication
between PLRG1 and Prp19 that enables E3 activity. This reveals a unique mode of
regulation for a complex E3 ligase and advances understanding of its dynamics in 
various cellular pathways.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2018.02.022 
PMID: 29547724  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Methods Mol Biol. 2018;1737:251-272. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-7634-8_15.

High-Resolution, High-Throughput Analysis of Hfq-Binding Sites Using UV
Crosslinking and Analysis of cDNA (CRAC).

Sy B(1), Wong J(1), Granneman S(2), Tollervey D(3), Gally D(4), Tree JJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, University of New South
Wales Sydney, Sydney, Australia.
(2)Institute of Structural and Molecular Biology, Centre for Synthetic and
Systems Biology (SynthSys), University of Edinburgh, Edinbugh, Scotland, UK.
(3)Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh,
Scotland, UK.
(4)Division of Infection and Immunity, The Roslin Institute, University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Scotland, UK.
(5)School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, University of New South
Wales Sydney, Sydney, Australia. j.tree@unsw.edu.au.

Small regulatory nonprotein-coding RNAs (sRNAs) have emerged as ubiquitous and
abundant regulators of gene expression in a diverse cross section of bacteria.
They play key roles in most aspects of bacterial physiology, including central
metabolism, nutrient acquisition, virulence, biofilm formation, and outer
membrane composition. RNA sequencing technologies have accelerated the
identification of bacterial regulatory RNAs and are now being employed to
understand their functions. Many regulatory RNAs require protein partners for
activity, or modulate the activity of interacting proteins. Understanding how and
where proteins interact with the transcriptome is essential to elucidate the
functions of the many sRNAs. Here, we describe the implementation in bacteria of 
a UV-crosslinking technique termed CRAC that allows stringent, transcriptome-wide
recovery of bacterial RNA-protein interaction sites in vivo and at base-pair
resolution. We have used CRAC to map protein-RNA interaction sites for the RNA
chaperone Hfq and ribonuclease RNase E in pathogenic E. coli, and toxins from
toxin-antitoxin systems in Mycobacterium smegmatis, demonstrating the broad
applicability of this technique.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-7634-8_15 
PMID: 29484598  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Trends Plant Sci. 2018 Apr;23(4):352-365. doi: 10.1016/j.tplants.2018.01.004.
Epub 2018 Feb 9.

Plant Ribonomics: Proteins in Search of RNA Partners.

Köster T(1), Meyer K(2).

Author information: 
(1)RNA Biology and Molecular Physiology, Faculty of Biology, Bielefeld
University, 33615 Bielefeld, Germany. Electronic address:
tino.koester@uni-bielefeld.de.
(2)RNA Biology and Molecular Physiology, Faculty of Biology, Bielefeld
University, 33615 Bielefeld, Germany.

Research into the regulation of gene expression underwent a shift from focusing
on DNA-binding proteins as key transcriptional regulators to RNA-binding proteins
(RBPs) that come into play once transcription has been initiated. RBPs
orchestrate all RNA-processing steps in the cell. To obtain a global view of in
vivo targets, the RNA complement associated with particular RBPs is determined
via immunoprecipitation of the RBP and subsequent identification of bound RNAs
via RNA-seq. Here, we describe technical advances in identifying RBP in vivo
targets and their binding motifs. We provide an up-to-date view of targets of
nucleocytoplasmic RBPs collected in arabidopsis. We also discuss current
experimental limitations and provide an outlook on how the approaches may advance
our understanding of post-transcriptional networks.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tplants.2018.01.004 
PMID: 29429586  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Int J Mol Sci. 2018 Feb 6;19(2). pii: E480. doi: 10.3390/ijms19020480.

CircSMARCA5 Inhibits Migration of Glioblastoma Multiforme Cells by Regulating a
Molecular Axis Involving Splicing Factors SRSF1/SRSF3/PTB.

Barbagallo D(1), Caponnetto A(2), Cirnigliaro M(3), Brex D(4), Barbagallo C(5),
D'Angeli F(6), Morrone A(7), Caltabiano R(8), Barbagallo GM(9)(10), Ragusa
M(11)(12), Di Pietro C(13), Hansen TB(14)(15), Purrello M(16)(17).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical and Biotechnological Sciences-Section of Biology and 
Genetics, University of Catania, 95123 Catania, Italy. dbarbaga@unict.it.
(2)Department of Biomedical and Biotechnological Sciences-Section of Biology and 
Genetics, University of Catania, 95123 Catania, Italy.
caponnettoangela@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Biomedical and Biotechnological Sciences-Section of Biology and 
Genetics, University of Catania, 95123 Catania, Italy.
matildecirnigliaro@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Biomedical and Biotechnological Sciences-Section of Biology and 
Genetics, University of Catania, 95123 Catania, Italy. duiliabrex@gmail.com.
(5)Department of Biomedical and Biotechnological Sciences-Section of Biology and 
Genetics, University of Catania, 95123 Catania, Italy.
barbagallocristina@gmail.com.
(6)Department of Biomedical and Biotechnological Sciences-Section of Biology and 
Genetics, University of Catania, 95123 Catania, Italy.
floriana.dangeli@hotmail.it.
(7)Department of Medical, Surgical Sciences and Advanced Technologies and
Biotechnological Sciences G.F. Ingrassia, University of Catania, 95123 Catania,
Italy. morant592@libero.it.
(8)Department of Medical, Surgical Sciences and Advanced Technologies and
Biotechnological Sciences G.F. Ingrassia, University of Catania, 95123 Catania,
Italy. rosario.caltabiano@unict.it.
(9)Department of Medical, Surgical Sciences and Advanced Technologies and
Biotechnological Sciences G.F. Ingrassia, University of Catania, 95123 Catania,
Italy. gbarbagallo@unict.it.
(10)Multidisciplinary Research Center on Brain Tumors Diagnosis and Therapy,
University of Catania, 95123 Catania, Italy. gbarbagallo@unict.it.
(11)Department of Biomedical and Biotechnological Sciences-Section of Biology and
Genetics, University of Catania, 95123 Catania, Italy. mragusa@unict.it.
(12)Multidisciplinary Research Center on Brain Tumors Diagnosis and Therapy,
University of Catania, 95123 Catania, Italy. mragusa@unict.it.
(13)Department of Biomedical and Biotechnological Sciences-Section of Biology and
Genetics, University of Catania, 95123 Catania, Italy. dipietro@unict.it.
(14)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics (MBG), Aarhus University, 8000
Aarhus C, Denmark. tbh@mbg.au.dk.
(15)Interdisciplinary Nanoscience Center (iNANO), Aarhus University, 8000 Aarhus 
C, Denmark. tbh@mbg.au.dk.
(16)Department of Biomedical and Biotechnological Sciences-Section of Biology and
Genetics, University of Catania, 95123 Catania, Italy. purrello@unict.it.
(17)Multidisciplinary Research Center on Brain Tumors Diagnosis and Therapy,
University of Catania, 95123 Catania, Italy. purrello@unict.it.

Circular RNAs (circRNAs) have recently emerged as a new class of RNAs, highly
enriched in the brain and very stable within cells, exosomes and body fluids. To 
analyze their involvement in glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) pathogenesis, we
assayed the expression of twelve circRNAs, physiologically enriched in several
regions of the brain, through real-time PCR in a cohort of fifty-six GBM patient 
biopsies and seven normal brain parenchymas. We focused on hsa_circ_0001445
(circSMARCA5): it was significantly downregulated in GBM biopsies as compared to 
normal brain tissues (p-value < 0.00001, student's t-test), contrary to its
linear isoform counterpart that did not show any differential expression (p-value
= 0.694, student's t-test). Analysis of a public dataset revealed a negative
correlation between the expression of circSMARCA5 and glioma's histological
grade, suggesting its potential negative role in the progression to malignancy.
Overexpressing circSMARCA5 in U87MG cells significantly decreased their
migration, but not their proliferation rate. In silico scanning of circSMARCA5
sequence revealed an enrichment in binding motifs for several RNA binding
proteins (RBPs), specifically involved in splicing. Among them, serine and
arginine rich splicing factor 1 (SRSF1), a splicing factor known to be a positive
controller of cell migration and known to be overexpressed in GBM, was predicted 
to bind circSMARCA5 by three different prediction tools. Direct interaction
between circSMARCA5 and SRSF1 is supported by enhanced UV crosslinking and
immunoprecipitation (eCLIP) data for SRSF1 in K562 cells from Encyclopedia of DNA
Elements (ENCODE). Consistently, U87MG overexpressing circSMARCA5 showed an
increased expression of serine and arginine rich splicing factor 3 (SRSF3) RNA
isoform containing exon 4, normally skipped in a SRSF1-dependent manner,
resulting in a non-productive non-sense mediated decay (NMD) substrate.
Interestingly, SRSF3 is known to interplay with two other splicing factors,
polypyrimidine tract binding protein 1 (PTBP1) and polypyrimidine tract binding
protein 2 (PTBP2), that positively regulate glioma cells migration. Collectively,
our data show circSMARCA5 as a promising druggable tumor suppressor in GBM and
suggest that it may exert its function by tethering the RBP SRSF1.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms19020480 
PMCID: PMC5855702
PMID: 29415469  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


29. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2018 Mar 12;57(12):3064-3068. doi:
10.1002/anie.201711242. Epub 2018 Feb 22.

A Crosslinked Nucleic Acid Nanogel for Effective siRNA Delivery and Antitumor
Therapy.

Ding F(1), Mou Q(1), Ma Y(1), Pan G(1), Guo Y(1), Tong G(1), Choi CHJ(2), Zhu
X(1), Zhang C(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, State Key Laboratory of Metal
Matrix Composites, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 800 Dongchuan Road, Shanghai,
200240, China.
(2)Department of Electronic Engineering (Biomedical Engineering), The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, China, Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong, China.

Functional siRNAs are employed as cross-linkers to direct the self-assembly of
DNA-grafted polycaprolactone (DNA-g-PCL) brushes to form spherical and nanosized 
hydrogels via nucleic acid hybridization in which small interfering RNAs (siRNAs)
are fully embedded and protected for systemic delivery. Owing to the existence of
multivalent mutual crosslinking events inside, the crosslinked nanogels with
tunable size exhibit not only good thermostability, but also remarkable
physiological stability that can resist the enzymatic degradation. As a novel
siRNA delivery system with spherical nucleic acid (SNA) architecture, the
crosslinked nanogels can assist the delivery of siRNAs into different cells
without any transfection agents and achieve the gene silencing effectively both
in vitro and in vivo, through which a significant inhibition of tumor growth is
realized in the anticancer treatment.

© 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/anie.201711242 
PMID: 29364558  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Nucleic Acids Res. 2018 Feb 16;46(3):1157-1166. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkx1179.

The TFIIE-related Rpc82 subunit of RNA polymerase III interacts with the
TFIIB-related transcription factor Brf1 and the polymerase cleft for
transcription initiation.

Khoo SK(1), Wu CC(1), Lin YC(1), Chen HT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica, 128 Sec. 2 Academia Rd.,
Taipei 115, Taiwan, R.O.C.

Rpc82 is a TFIIE-related subunit of the eukaryotic RNA polymerase III (pol III)
complex. Rpc82 contains four winged-helix (WH) domains and a C-terminal
coiled-coil domain. Structural resolution of the pol III complex indicated that
Rpc82 anchors on the clamp domain of the pol III cleft to interact with the
duplex DNA downstream of the transcription bubble. However, whether Rpc82
interacts with a transcription factor is still not known. Here, we report that a 
structurally disordered insertion in the third WH domain of Rpc82 is important
for cell growth and in vitro transcription activity. Site-specific
photo-crosslinking analysis indicated that the WH3 insertion interacts with the
TFIIB-related transcription factor Brf1 within the pre-initiation complex (PIC). 
Moreover, crosslinking and hydroxyl radical probing analyses revealed Rpc82
interactions with the upstream DNA and the protrusion and wall domains of the pol
III cleft. Our genetic and biochemical analyses thus provide new molecular
insights into the function of Rpc82 in pol III transcription.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkx1179 
PMCID: PMC5814912
PMID: 29177422  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Nat Commun. 2017 Nov 17;8(1):1596. doi: 10.1038/s41467-017-01613-1.

Global role of the bacterial post-transcriptional regulator CsrA revealed by
integrated transcriptomics.

Potts AH(1), Vakulskas CA(1)(2), Pannuri A(1), Yakhnin H(3), Babitzke P(3), Romeo
T(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, University of Florida, Institute 
of Food and Agricultural Sciences, Gainesville, FL, 32611-0700, USA.
(2)Integrated DNA Technologies, Molecular Genetics Department, 1710 Commercial
Park, Coralville, IA, 52241, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Center for RNA Molecular
Biology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania, PA, 16802,
USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, University of Florida, Institute 
of Food and Agricultural Sciences, Gainesville, FL, 32611-0700, USA.
tromeo@ufl.edu.

CsrA is a post-transcriptional regulatory protein that is widely distributed
among bacteria. This protein influences bacterial lifestyle decisions by binding 
to the 5' untranslated and/or early coding regions of mRNA targets, causing
changes in translation initiation, RNA stability, and/or transcription
elongation. Here, we assess the contribution of CsrA to gene expression in
Escherichia coli on a global scale. UV crosslinking immunoprecipitation and
sequencing (CLIP-seq) identify RNAs that interact directly with CsrA in vivo,
while ribosome profiling and RNA-seq uncover the impact of CsrA on translation,
RNA abundance, and RNA stability. This combination of approaches reveals
unprecedented detail about the regulatory role of CsrA, including novel binding
targets and physiological roles, such as in envelope function and iron
homeostasis. Our findings highlight the integration of CsrA throughout the E.
coli regulatory network, where it orchestrates vast effects on gene expression.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-017-01613-1 
PMCID: PMC5694010
PMID: 29150605  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Histochem Cytochem. 2018 Feb;66(2):121-135. doi: 10.1369/0022155417741467. Epub
2017 Nov 10.

Histomorphological and Molecular Assessments of the Fixation Times Comparing
Formalin and Ethanol-Based Fixatives.

Chung JY(1), Song JS(1)(2), Ylaya K(1), Sears JD(1), Choi L(1), Cho H(1)(3),
Rosenberg AZ(4), Hewitt SM(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Pathology Laboratory, Laboratory of Pathology, Center for Cancer 
Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland.
(2)Department of Pathology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of
Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Gangnam Severance Hospital, Yonsei
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore,
Maryland.

The lack of standardization of tissue handling and processing hinders the
development and validation of new biomarkers in research and clinical settings.
We compared the histomorphology and the quality and quantity of biomolecules in
paraffin-embedded mouse tissues, followed by fixation with neutral buffered
formalin (NBF), 70% ethanol, and buffered ethanol (BE70) fixative. The quality of
the histomorphology and immunohistochemistry in BE70 was relatively
time-independent, whereas those in NBF rapidly decreased after 1 week of
fixation. Protein recovered from tissue fixed in 70% ethanol and BE70 was
compatible with Western blot and protein array using AKT and GAPDH antibodies,
regardless of the fixation time. In addition, the quality and quantity of RNA
extracted from tissue in ethanol-based fixative showed minimal changes from 4 hr 
to 6 months, whereas NBF had a dramatic detrimental change in RNA quality after 1
week of fixation. Furthermore, ethanol-based fixative offers a superior DNA
template for PCR amplification-based molecular assays than NBF. In conclusion,
coagulative, ethanol-based fixatives show a broader time spectrum than the
aldehyde crosslinking fixative NBF in their histomorphological features and the
quantity and quality of the biomolecules from paraffin-embedded tissue, and they 
may facilitate the use of fixative-fixed paraffin-embedded tissues in research
and clinical laboratories, avoiding overfixation.

DOI: 10.1369/0022155417741467 
PMCID: PMC5794201
PMID: 29125916  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Chem Commun (Camb). 2017 Nov 28;53(95):12746-12749. doi: 10.1039/c7cc06708a.

Mapping platinum adducts on yeast ribosomal RNA using high-throughput sequencing.

Plakos K(1), DeRose VJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry and Institute of Molecular Biology,
University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403, USA. derose@uoregon.edu.

Methods to map small-molecule binding sites on cellular RNAs are important for
understanding interactions with both endogenous and exogenous compounds. Pt(ii)
reagents are well-known DNA and RNA crosslinking agents, but sequence-specific
and genome-wide identification of Pt targets following in-cell treatment is
challenging. Here we describe application of high-throughput 'Pt-Seq' to identify
Pt-rRNA adducts following treatment of S. cerevisiae with cisplatin.

DOI: 10.1039/c7cc06708a 
PMCID: PMC5729026
PMID: 29099140  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


34. EMBO Rep. 2017 Nov;18(11):2004-2014. doi: 10.15252/embr.201744940. Epub 2017 Oct 
19.

Human METTL16 is a N6-methyladenosine (m6A) methyltransferase that targets
pre-mRNAs and various non-coding RNAs.

Warda AS(1), Kretschmer J(1), Hackert P(1), Lenz C(2)(3), Urlaub H(2)(3),
Höbartner C(4)(5), Sloan KE(1), Bohnsack MT(6)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University Medical Center Göttingen,
Göttingen, Germany.
(2)Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group, Max-Planck-Institute for Biophysical
Chemistry, Göttingen, Germany.
(3)Department of Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Göttingen,
Göttingen, Germany.
(4)Institute for Organic and Biomolecular Chemistry, Georg-August-University,
Göttingen, Germany.
(5)Göttingen Center for Molecular Biosciences, Georg-August-University,
Göttingen, Germany.
(6)Department of Molecular Biology, University Medical Center Göttingen,
Göttingen, Germany markus.bohnsack@med.uni-goettingen.de.

N6-methyladenosine (m6A) is a highly dynamic RNA modification that has recently
emerged as a key regulator of gene expression. While many m6A modifications are
installed by the METTL3-METTL14 complex, others appear to be introduced
independently, implying that additional human m6A methyltransferases remain to be
identified. Using crosslinking and analysis of cDNA (CRAC), we reveal that the
putative human m6A "writer" protein METTL16 binds to the U6 snRNA and other
ncRNAs as well as numerous lncRNAs and pre-mRNAs. We demonstrate that METTL16 is 
responsible for N6-methylation of A43 of the U6 snRNA and identify the early U6
biogenesis factors La, LARP7 and the methylphosphate capping enzyme MEPCE as
METTL16 interaction partners. Interestingly, A43 lies within an essential ACAGAGA
box of U6 that base pairs with 5' splice sites of pre-mRNAs during splicing,
suggesting that METTL16-mediated modification of this site plays an important
role in splicing regulation. The identification of METTL16 as an active m6A
methyltransferase in human cells expands our understanding of the mechanisms by
which the m6A landscape is installed on cellular RNAs.

© 2017 The Authors.

DOI: 10.15252/embr.201744940 
PMCID: PMC5666602
PMID: 29051200  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Elife. 2017 Oct 13;6. pii: e27082. doi: 10.7554/eLife.27082.

RNA polymerase II stalling at pre-mRNA splice sites is enforced by ubiquitination
of the catalytic subunit.

Milligan L(1), Sayou C(1), Tuck A(2), Auchynnikava T(1), Reid JE(1), Alexander
R(1), Alves FL(1), Allshire R(1), Spanos C(1), Rappsilber J(1)(3), Beggs JD(1),
Kudla G(4), Tollervey D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh,
Scotland.
(2)Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Basel, Switzerland.
(3)Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(4)MRC Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine,
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Scotland.

Numerous links exist between co-transcriptional RNA processing and the
transcribing RNAPII. In particular, pre-mRNA splicing was reported to be
associated with slowed RNAPII elongation. Here, we identify a site of
ubiquitination (K1246) in the catalytic subunit of RNAPII close to the DNA entry 
path. Ubiquitination was increased in the absence of the Bre5-Ubp3 ubiquitin
protease complex. Bre5 binds RNA in vivo, with a preference for exon 2 regions of
intron-containing pre-mRNAs and poly(A) proximal sites. Ubiquitinated RNAPII
showed similar enrichment. The absence of Bre5 led to impaired splicing and
defects in RNAPII elongation in vivo on a splicing reporter construct. Strains
expressing RNAPII with a K1246R mutation showed reduced co-transcriptional
splicing. We propose that ubiquinitation of RNAPII is induced by RNA processing
events and linked to transcriptional pausing, which is released by Bre5-Ubp3
associated with the nascent transcript.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.27082 
PMCID: PMC5673307
PMID: 29027900  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Vis Exp. 2017 Sep 28;(127). doi: 10.3791/56004.

Sample Preparation for Mass Spectrometry-based Identification of RNA-binding
Regions.

Warneford-Thomson R(1), He C(2), Sidoli S(3), Garcia BA(3), Bonasio R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Epigenetics Institute, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine;
Graduate Group in Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of Pennsylvania
Perelman School of Medicine.
(2)Epigenetics Institute, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine;
Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania Perelman
School of Medicine.
(3)Epigenetics Institute, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine;
Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of Pennsylvania Perelman
School of Medicine.
(4)Epigenetics Institute, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine;
Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania Perelman
School of Medicine; rbon@mail.med.upenn.edu.

Noncoding RNAs play important roles in several nuclear processes, including
regulating gene expression, chromatin structure, and DNA repair. In most cases,
the action of noncoding RNAs is mediated by proteins whose functions are in turn 
regulated by these interactions with noncoding RNAs. Consistent with this, a
growing number of proteins involved in nuclear functions have been reported to
bind RNA and in a few cases the RNA-binding regions of these proteins have been
mapped, often through laborious, candidate-based methods. Here, we report a
detailed protocol to perform a high-throughput, proteome-wide unbiased
identification of RNA-binding proteins and their RNA-binding regions. The
methodology relies on the incorporation of a photoreactive uridine analog in the 
cellular RNA, followed by UV-mediated protein-RNA crosslinking, and mass
spectrometry analyses to reveal RNA-crosslinked peptides within the proteome.
Although we describe the procedure for mouse embryonic stem cells, the protocol
should be easily adapted to a variety of cultured cells.

DOI: 10.3791/56004 
PMCID: PMC5752346
PMID: 28994809  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Mol Cell. 2017 Oct 19;68(2):388-397.e6. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2017.09.006. Epub
2017 Oct 5.

6S RNA Mimics B-Form DNA to Regulate Escherichia coli RNA Polymerase.

Chen J(1), Wassarman KM(2), Feng S(1), Leon K(1), Feklistov A(1), Winkelman
JT(2), Li Z(3), Walz T(4), Campbell EA(5), Darst SA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY
10065, USA.
(2)Department of Bacteriology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI
53706, USA.
(3)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD 20815, USA; Department of
Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(4)Laboratory of Molecular Electron Microscopy, The Rockefeller University, New
York, NY 10065, USA.
(5)Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY
10065, USA. Electronic address: elizabeth.campbell0@gmail.com.
(6)Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY
10065, USA. Electronic address: darst@rockefeller.edu.

Noncoding RNAs (ncRNAs) regulate gene expression in all organisms. Bacterial 6S
RNAs globally regulate transcription by binding RNA polymerase (RNAP) holoenzyme 
and competing with promoter DNA. Escherichia coli (Eco) 6S RNA interacts
specifically with the housekeeping σ70-holoenzyme (Eσ70) and plays a key role in 
the transcriptional reprogramming upon shifts between exponential and stationary 
phase. Inhibition is relieved upon 6S RNA-templated RNA synthesis. We report here
the 3.8 Å resolution structure of a complex between 6S RNA and Eσ70 determined by
single-particle cryo-electron microscopy and validation of the structure using
footprinting and crosslinking approaches. Duplex RNA segments have A-form C3'
endo sugar puckers but widened major groove widths, giving the RNA an overall
architecture that mimics B-form promoter DNA. Our results help explain the
specificity of Eco 6S RNA for Eσ70 and show how an ncRNA can mimic B-form DNA to 
directly regulate transcription by the DNA-dependent RNAP.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2017.09.006 
PMCID: PMC5683422
PMID: 28988932  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Nature. 2017 Oct 5;550(7674):124-127. doi: 10.1038/nature24039. Epub 2017 Sep 27.

CG dinucleotide suppression enables antiviral defence targeting non-self RNA.

Takata MA(1), Gonçalves-Carneiro D(1), Zang TM(1)(2), Soll SJ(1)(2), York A(1),
Blanco-Melo D(1), Bieniasz PD(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Retrovirology, The Rockefeller University, New York, New York,
USA.
(2)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The Rockefeller University, New York, New
York, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2017 Oct 5;550(7674):46-47.
    Nat Rev Microbiol. 2017 Oct 12;15(11):641.
    Cell Host Microbe. 2017 Nov 8;22(5):575-576.

Vertebrate genomes exhibit marked CG suppression-that is, lower than expected
numbers of 5'-CG-3' dinucleotides. This feature is likely to be due to C-to-T
mutations that have accumulated over hundreds of millions of years, driven by
CG-specific DNA methyl transferases and spontaneous methyl-cytosine deamination. 
Many RNA viruses of vertebrates that are not substrates for DNA methyl
transferases mimic the CG suppression of their hosts. This property of viral
genomes is unexplained. Here we show, using synonymous mutagenesis, that CG
suppression is essential for HIV-1 replication. The deleterious effect of CG
dinucleotides on HIV-1 replication was cumulative, associated with cytoplasmic
RNA depletion, and was exerted by CG dinucleotides in both translated and
non-translated exonic RNA sequences. A focused screen using small inhibitory RNAs
revealed that zinc-finger antiviral protein (ZAP) inhibited virion production by 
cells infected with CG-enriched HIV-1. Crucially, HIV-1 mutants containing
segments whose CG content mimicked random nucleotide sequence were defective in
unmanipulated cells, but replicated normally in ZAP-deficient cells.
Crosslinking-immunoprecipitation-sequencing assays demonstrated that ZAP binds
directly and selectively to RNA sequences containing CG dinucleotides. These
findings suggest that ZAP exploits host CG suppression to identify non-self RNA. 
The dinucleotide composition of HIV-1, and perhaps other RNA viruses, appears to 
have adapted to evade this host defence.

DOI: 10.1038/nature24039 
PMCID: PMC6592701
PMID: 28953888  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Thorac Cancer. 2017 Nov;8(6):682-686. doi: 10.1111/1759-7714.12478. Epub 2017 Sep
18.

Association between polymorphisms in microRNA target sites and survival in
early-stage non-small cell lung cancer.

Yoo SS(1), Hong MJ(2), Lee JH(3), Choi JE(2), Lee SY(1), Lee J(1), Cha SI(1), Kim
CH(1), Seok Y(4), Lee E(4), Cho S(5), Jheon S(5), Park JY(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, Kyungpook National
University, Daegu, South Korea.
(2)Cell and Matrix Research Institute, School of Medicine, Kyungpook National
University, Daegu, South Korea.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, School of Medicine, Kyungpook
National University, Daegu, South Korea.
(4)Department of Thoracic Surgery, School of Medicine, Kyungpook National
University, Daegu, South Korea.
(5)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, School of Medicine, Seoul
National University, Seoul, South Korea.

A high-throughput mapping method of RNA-RNA interactions by crosslinking,
ligation, and sequencing of hybrids (CLASH) can not only provide information
about canonical but also non-canonical interactions. We evaluated the
associations between variants in microRNA target sites using CLASH data and
survival outcomes of 782 early-stage non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients 
who underwent curative surgical resection. Among the 100 variants studied, two
variants showed significant association with survival outcomes. The POLR2A
rs2071504 C > T variant was associated with poor overall and disease-free
survival under a dominant model (hazard ratio [HR] 1.42, 95% confidence interval 
[CI] 1.08-1.88; P = 0.01 and HR 1.34, 95% CI 1.08-1.67; P = 0.01, respectively). 
Patients carrying the NR2F6 rs2288539 TT genotype showed significantly better
overall survival than those with the NR2F6 rs2288539 CC or CT genotypes (HR 0.13,
95% CI 0.02-0.90; P = 0.04). These findings suggest that POLR2A rs2071504 C > T
and NR2F6 rs2288539 C > T can influence prognosis in early-stage NSCLC patients.

© 2017 The Authors. Thoracic Cancer published by China Lung Oncology Group and
John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1759-7714.12478 
PMCID: PMC5668488
PMID: 28922562  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Nucleic Acids Res. 2017 Sep 6;45(15):8968-8977. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkx584.

Genome-wide analysis of influenza viral RNA and nucleoprotein association.

Lee N(1), Le Sage V(1), Nanni AV(1), Snyder DJ(1), Cooper VS(1), Lakdawala SS(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Department of Microbiology and
Molecular Genetics, 450 Technology Drive, Pittsburgh, PA 15219, USA.

Influenza A virus (IAV) genomes are composed of eight single-stranded RNA
segments that are coated by viral nucleoprotein (NP) molecules. Classically, the 
interaction between NP and viral RNA (vRNA) is depicted as a uniform pattern of
'beads on a string'. Using high-throughput sequencing of RNA isolated by
crosslinking immunoprecipitation (HITS-CLIP), we identified the vRNA binding
profiles of NP for two H1N1 IAV strains in virions. Contrary to the prevailing
model for vRNA packaging, NP does not bind vRNA uniformly in the A/WSN/1933 and
A/California/07/2009 strains, but instead each vRNA segment exhibits a unique
binding profile, containing sites that are enriched or poor in NP association.
Intriguingly, both H1N1 strains have similar yet distinct NP binding profiles
despite extensive sequence conservation. Peaks identified by HITS-CLIP were
verified as true NP binding sites based on insensitivity to DNA antisense
oligonucleotide-mediated RNase H digestion. Moreover, nucleotide content analysis
of NP peaks revealed that these sites are relatively G-rich and U-poor compared
to the genome-wide nucleotide content, indicating an as-yet unidentified sequence
bias for NP association in vivo. Taken together, our genome-wide study of NP-vRNA
interaction has implications for the understanding of influenza vRNA architecture
and genome packaging.

© The Author(s) 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkx584 
PMCID: PMC5587783
PMID: 28911100  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Toxicology. 2017 Aug 15;389:67-73. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2017.07.007. Epub 2017 Jul 
15.

Formation and degradation of nitrogen mustard-induced MGMT-DNA crosslinking in
16HBE cells.

Cheng J(1), Ye F(1), Dan G(1), Zhao Y(1), Zhao J(1), Zou Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Toxicology, School of Preventive Medicine, The Third Military
Medical University, 30 Gaotanyan Street, Shapingba District, Chongqing 400038,
China.
(2)Institute of Toxicology, School of Preventive Medicine, The Third Military
Medical University, 30 Gaotanyan Street, Shapingba District, Chongqing 400038,
China. Electronic address: zmzou@tmmu.edu.cn.

N-methyl-2,2-di(chloroethyl)amine (HN2) is a kind of bifunctional alkyltating
agent, which can react with nucleophilic groups in DNA and/or protein to form
HN2-bridged crosslinking of target molecules, such as DNA-protein crosslinkings
(DPC). O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) is a DNA damage repair
enzyme which solely repairs alkyl adduct on DNA directly. However, MGMT was
detected to act as a protein cross-linked with DNA via alkylation in presence of 
HN2, and unexpectedly turned into a DNA damage enhancer in the form of MGMT-DNA
cross-link (mDPC). Present study aimed to explore the possible ways to lessen the
incorporation of MGMT into DPC as well as to save it for DNA repair. To find out 
the influencing factors of mDPC formation and cleavage, human bronchial
epithelial cell line 16HBE was exposed to HN2 and the factors related with MGMT
expression and degradation were investigated. When c-Myc, a negative
transcriptional factor of MGMT was inhibited by 10058-F4, MGMT expression and
mDPC formation were increased, and more γ-H2AX was also detected. Sustained
treatment with O6BG, a specific exogenous substrate and depleter of MGMT, could
reduce the level of MGMT and mDPC formation. In contrast, a transient 1h
pre-treatment of O6GB before HN2 exposure would cause a high MGMT and mDPC level.
MGMT was increasingly ubiquitinated after HN2 exposure in a time-dependent
manner. At the same time, MGMT was also SUMOylated with a downward time-dependent
manner compared to its ubiquitination. Inhibitors of E1, E2 or E3 ligases of
ubiqutination all led to the accumulation of mDPC and total-DPC (tDPC) with the
difference as that mDPC was sensitive to E1 inhibitor while tDPC more sensitive
to E2 and E3 inhibitor. Our results demonstrated the control of mDPC level could 
be realized through transcription inhibitory effect of c-Myc, O6GB application,
and the acceleration of mDPC ubiquitination and subsequent degradation.

Copyright © 2017. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tox.2017.07.007 
PMID: 28720507  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Chem Sci. 2017 Jun 1;8(6):4250-4256. doi: 10.1039/c7sc00284j. Epub 2017 Mar 14.

Site-specific azide-acetyllysine photochemistry on epigenetic readers for
interactome profiling.

Sudhamalla B(1), Dey D(1), Breski M(1), Nguyen T(1), Islam K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry , University of Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania 15260 , USA 
. Email: kai27@pitt.edu.

Chemical modifications on DNA, RNA and histones are recognized by an array of
'reader' modules to regulate transcriptional programming and cell fate. However, 
identification of reader-specific interacting partners in a dynamic cellular
environment remains a significant challenge. Herein, we report a chemoproteomic
approach termed 'interaction-based protein profiling' (IBPP) to characterize
novel interacting partners of potentially any reader protein. IBPP harnesses a
photosensitive amino acid introduced into the hydrophobic pocket of a reader
module to crosslink and enrich transient interacting partners that are
inaccessible to traditional methods. Using bromodomain-containing protein 4
(BRD4) as a paradigm, we engineer an 'aromatic cage' of the bromodomain to
introduce 4-azido-l-phenylalanine (pAzF) without compromising its ability to
recognize acetylated lysine residues in histone proteins. We establish the
binding efficiency, substrate specificity and crosslinking ability of the
engineered 'reader' module in biochemical assays. Applying IBPP, we uncovered
novel acetylated interacting partners of BRD4, such as transcription factors,
expanding on its previously unappreciated role in diverse biological processes.
By setting up an azide-acetyllysine photoreaction deep inside the bromodomain
aromatic cage as a means to detect protein acetylation, our approach provides a
potentially general platform for rapid and unbiased profiling of interacting
partners of diverse epigenetic readers whose functions in eukaryotic gene
regulation remain convoluted.

DOI: 10.1039/c7sc00284j 
PMCID: PMC5468995
PMID: 28626565 


43. Mol Microbiol. 2017 Aug;105(4):652-662. doi: 10.1111/mmi.13724. Epub 2017 Jun 19.

A novel RNA polymerase-binding protein that interacts with a sigma-factor docking
site.

Wang Erickson AF(1), Deighan P(2)(3), Chen S(1), Barrasso K(2)(3), Garcia
CP(2)(3), Martínez-Lumbreras S(4), Alfano C(4), Krysztofinska EM(4), Thapaliya
A(4), Camp AH(5), Isaacson RL(4), Hochschild A(2), Losick R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
MA, 02138, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
MA, 02115, USA.
(3)Department of Biology, Emmanuel College, 400 The Fenway, Boston, MA, 02115,
USA.
(4)Department of Chemistry, King's College London, Britannia House, Trinity
Street, London, UK.
(5)Department of Biological Sciences, Mount Holyoke College, South Hadley, MA,
01075, USA.

Sporulation in Bacillus subtilis is governed by a cascade of alternative RNA
polymerase sigma factors. We previously identified a small protein Fin that is
produced under the control of the sporulation sigma factor σF to create a
negative feedback loop that inhibits σF -directed gene transcription. Cells
deleted for fin are defective for spore formation and exhibit increased levels of
σF -directed gene transcription. Based on pull-down experiments, chemical
crosslinking, bacterial two-hybrid experiments and nuclear magnetic resonance
chemical shift analysis, we now report that Fin binds to RNA polymerase and
specifically to the coiled-coil region of the β' subunit. The coiled-coil is a
docking site for sigma factors on RNA polymerase, and evidence is presented that 
the binding of Fin and σF to RNA polymerase is mutually exclusive. We propose
that Fin functions by a mechanism distinct from that of classic sigma factor
antagonists (anti-σ factors), which bind directly to a target sigma factor to
prevent its association with RNA polymerase, and instead functions to inhibit σF 
by competing for binding to the β' coiled-coil.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.13724 
PMCID: PMC5558796
PMID: 28598017  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Nat Microbiol. 2017 Apr 28;2:17062. doi: 10.1038/nmicrobiol.2017.62.

Structural basis for λN-dependent processive transcription antitermination.

Said N(1), Krupp F(2), Anedchenko E(1), Santos KF(1), Dybkov O(3), Huang YH(1),
Lee CT(4)(5), Loll B(1), Behrmann E(2), Bürger J(2)(6), Mielke T(5), Loerke J(2),
Urlaub H(4)(5), Spahn CMT(2), Weber G(1), Wahl MC(1)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Structural Biochemistry, Freie Universität Berlin, Takustraβe 6,
D-14195 Berlin, Germany.
(2)Medizinische Physik und Biophysik, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin,
Charitéplatz 1, D-10117 Berlin, Germany.
(3)Department of Cellular Biochemistry, Max Planck Institut für biophysikalische 
Chemie, Am Fassberg 11, D-37077 Göttingen, Germany.
(4)Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry, Max Planck Institut für biophysikalische
Chemie, Am Fassberg 11, D-37077 Göttingen, Germany.
(5)Institut für Klinische Chemie, Bioanalytik, Universitätsmedizin Göttingen,
Robert-Koch-Straße 40, D-35075 Göttingen, Germany.
(6)Microscopy and Cryo-Electron Microscopy Group, Max-Planck-Institut für
Molekulare Genetik, Ihnestraße 63-73, D-14195 Berlin, Germany.
(7)Macromolecular Crystallography, Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin für Materialien und
Energie, Albert-Einstein-Straße 15, D-12489 Berlin, Germany.

λN-mediated processive antitermination constitutes a paradigmatic transcription
regulatory event, during which phage protein λN, host factors NusA, NusB, NusE
and NusG, and an RNA nut site render elongating RNA polymerase
termination-resistant. The structural basis of the process has so far remained
elusive. Here we describe a crystal structure of a λN-NusA-NusB-NusE-nut site
complex and an electron cryo-microscopic structure of a complete transcription
antitermination complex, comprising RNA polymerase, DNA, nut site RNA, all Nus
factors and λN, validated by crosslinking/mass spectrometry. Due to intrinsic
disorder, λN can act as a multiprotein/RNA interaction hub, which, together with 
nut site RNA, arranges NusA, NusB and NusE into a triangular complex. This
complex docks via the NusA N-terminal domain and the λN C-terminus next to the
RNA exit channel on RNA polymerase. Based on the structures, comparative
crosslinking analyses and structure-guided mutagenesis, we hypothesize that λN
mounts a multipronged strategy to reprogram the transcriptional machinery, which 
may include (1) the λN C terminus clamping the RNA exit channel, thus stabilizing
the DNA:RNA hybrid; (2) repositioning of NusA and RNAP elements, thus redirecting
nascent RNA and sequestering the upstream branch of a terminator hairpin; and (3)
hindering RNA engagement of termination factor ρ and/or obstructing ρ
translocation on the transcript.

DOI: 10.1038/nmicrobiol.2017.62 
PMID: 28452979  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Nucleic Acids Res. 2017 Jul 7;45(12):e115. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkx292.

Using high-throughput barcode sequencing to efficiently map connectomes.

Peikon ID(1)(2), Kebschull JM(1)(2), Vagin VV(2), Ravens DI(2), Sun YC(2),
Brouzes E(3)(4), Corrêa IR Jr(5), Bressan D(1)(2)(6), Zador AM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Watson School of Biological Sciences, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold
Spring Harbor, NY 11724, USA.
(2)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY 11724, USA.
(3)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 
11794, USA.
(4)Laufer Center for Physical and Quantitative Biology, Stony Brook University,
Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA.
(5)New England Biolabs, Inc., Ipswich, MA 01938, USA.
(6)Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK.

The function of a neural circuit is determined by the details of its synaptic
connections. At present, the only available method for determining a neural
wiring diagram with single synapse precision-a 'connectome'-is based on imaging
methods that are slow, labor-intensive and expensive. Here, we present SYNseq, a 
method for converting the connectome into a form that can exploit the speed and
low cost of modern high-throughput DNA sequencing. In SYNseq, each neuron is
labeled with a unique random nucleotide sequence-an RNA 'barcode'-which is
targeted to the synapse using engineered proteins. Barcodes in pre- and
postsynaptic neurons are then associated through protein-protein crosslinking
across the synapse, extracted from the tissue, and joined into a form suitable
for sequencing. Although our failure to develop an efficient barcode joining
scheme precludes the widespread application of this approach, we expect that with
further development SYNseq will enable tracing of complex circuits at high speed 
and low cost.

© The Author(s) 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkx292 
PMCID: PMC5499584
PMID: 28449067  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Nucleic Acids Res. 2017 Jun 2;45(10):6074-6086. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkx152.

sCLIP-an integrated platform to study RNA-protein interactomes in biomedical
research: identification of CSTF2tau in alternative processing of small nuclear
RNAs.

Kargapolova Y(1)(2), Levin M(1)(2), Lackner K(1)(3), Danckwardt S(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, University Medical
Center Mainz, Germany.
(2)Center for Thrombosis and Hemostasis (CTH), University Medical Center Mainz,
Germany.
(3)German Center for Cardiovascular Research (DZHK), Germany.

RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) are central for gene expression by controlling the
RNA fate from birth to decay. Various disorders arising from perturbations of
RNA-protein interactions document their critical function. However, deciphering
their function is complex, limiting the general functional elucidation of this
growing class of proteins and their contribution to (patho)physiology. Here, we
present sCLIP, a simplified and robust platform for genome-wide interrogation of 
RNA-protein interactomes based on crosslinking-immunoprecipitation and
high-throughput sequencing. sCLIP exploits linear amplification of the
immunoprecipitated RNA improving the complexity of the sequencing-library despite
significantly reducing the amount of input material and omitting several
purification steps. Additionally, it permits a radiolabel-free visualization of
immunoprecipitated RNA. In a proof of concept, we identify that CSTF2tau binds
many previously not recognized RNAs including histone, snoRNA and snRNAs.
CSTF2tau-binding is associated with internal oligoadenylation resulting in
shortened snRNA isoforms subjected to rapid degradation. We provide evidence for 
a new mechanism whereby CSTF2tau controls the abundance of snRNAs resulting in
alternative splicing of several RNAs including ANK2 with critical roles in
tumorigenesis and cardiac function. Combined with a bioinformatic pipeline sCLIP 
thus uncovers new functions for established RBPs and fosters the illumination of 
RBP-protein interaction landscapes in health and disease.

© The Author(s) 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkx152 
PMCID: PMC5449641
PMID: 28334977  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Elife. 2017 Mar 20;6. pii: e25478. doi: 10.7554/eLife.25478.

Structural basis of transcription arrest by coliphage HK022 Nun in an Escherichia
coli RNA polymerase elongation complex.

Kang JY(1), Olinares PD(2), Chen J(1), Campbell EA(1), Mustaev A(3)(4)(5), Chait 
BT(2), Gottesman ME(6), Darst SA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics, The Rockefeller University, New York City,
United States.
(2)Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry and Gaseous Ion Chemistry, The Rockefeller
University, New York City, United States.
(3)Public Health Research Institute, Newark, United States.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Rutgers Biomedical and
Health Sciences, Newark, United States.
(5)Rutgers New Jersey Medical School, Rutgers Biomedical and Health Sciences,
Newark, United States.
(6)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Columbia University Medical Center,
New York City, United States.

Coliphage HK022 Nun blocks superinfection by coliphage λ by stalling RNA
polymerase (RNAP) translocation specifically on λ DNA. To provide a structural
framework to understand how Nun blocks RNAP translocation, we determined
structures of Escherichia coli RNAP ternary elongation complexes (TECs) with and 
without Nun by single-particle cryo-electron microscopy. Nun fits tightly into
the TEC by taking advantage of gaps between the RNAP and the nucleic acids. The
C-terminal segment of Nun interacts with the RNAP β and β' subunits inside the
RNAP active site cleft as well as with nearly every element of the nucleic acid
scaffold, essentially crosslinking the RNAP and the nucleic acids to prevent
translocation, a mechanism supported by the effects of Nun amino acid
substitutions. The nature of Nun interactions inside the RNAP active site cleft
suggests that RNAP clamp opening is required for Nun to establish its
interactions, explaining why Nun acts on paused TECs.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.25478 
PMCID: PMC5386594
PMID: 28318486  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Cell Rep. 2017 Feb 28;18(9):2135-2147. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2017.02.017.

Loss of Snf5 Induces Formation of an Aberrant SWI/SNF Complex.

Sen P(1), Luo J(2), Hada A(3), Hailu SG(3), Dechassa ML(1), Persinger J(3),
Brahma S(4), Paul S(4), Ranish J(2), Bartholomew B(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Southern Illinois
University, Carbondale, IL 62901, USA.
(2)Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, WA 98109, USA.
(3)UT MD Anderson Cancer Center, Smithville, TX 78597, USA; UT MD Anderson Center
for Cancer Epigenetics, Smithville, TX 78597, USA.
(4)UT MD Anderson Cancer Center, Smithville, TX 78597, USA.
(5)UT MD Anderson Cancer Center, Smithville, TX 78597, USA; UT MD Anderson Center
for Cancer Epigenetics, Smithville, TX 78597, USA. Electronic address:
bbartholomew@mdanderson.org.

The SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex is highly conserved from yeast to human,
and aberrant SWI/SNF complexes contribute to human disease. The Snf5/SMARCB1/INI1
subunit of SWI/SNF is a tumor suppressor frequently lost in pediatric rhabdoid
cancers. We examined the effects of Snf5 loss on the composition, nucleosome
binding, recruitment, and remodeling activities of yeast SWI/SNF. The Snf5
subunit is shown by crosslinking-mass spectrometry (CX-MS) and subunit deletion
analysis to interact with the ATPase domain of Snf2 and to form a submodule
consisting of Snf5, Swp82, and Taf14. Snf5 promotes binding of the Snf2 ATPase
domain to nucleosomal DNA and enhances the catalytic and nucleosome remodeling
activities of SWI/SNF. Snf5 is also required for SWI/SNF recruitment by acidic
transcription factors. RNA-seq analysis suggests that both the recruitment and
remodeling functions of Snf5 are required in vivo for SWI/SNF regulation of gene 
expression. Thus, loss of SNF5 alters the structure and function of SWI/SNF.

Copyright © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2017.02.017 
PMCID: PMC5424545
PMID: 28249160  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Molecules. 2017 Feb 28;22(3). pii: E382. doi: 10.3390/molecules22030382.

Under-Reported Aspects of Platinum Drug Pharmacology.

Theile D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology and Pharmacoepidemiology, University of
Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 410, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
dirk.theile@med.uni-heidelberg.de.

Platinum drugs remain the backbone of many antineoplastic regimens. Among the
numerous chemical or pharmacological effects of platinum drugs, some aspects tend
to be under-reported. Thus, this perspective paper intends to stress some
neglected properties of platinum drugs: first, the physico-chemical
characteristics (aquation reaction kinetics) that determine site-specific
toxicity; second, the impact on RNA molecules. Knowledge of the 'RNA world' has
dramatically changed our understanding of cellular and molecular biology. The
inherent RNA-crosslinking properties should make platinum-based drugs interact
with coding and non-coding RNAs. Third, we will discuss the impact on the immune 
system, which is now recognized to substantially contribute to chemotherapy
efficacy. Together, platinum drugs are in fact old drugs, but are worth
re-focusing on. Many aspects are still mysterious but can pave the way to new
drugs or an improved application of the already existing compounds.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules22030382 
PMCID: PMC6155231
PMID: 29760371  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Sci Rep. 2017 Feb 22;7:42943. doi: 10.1038/srep42943.

Methylated-antibody affinity purification to improve proteomic identification of 
plant RNA polymerase Pol V complex and the interacting proteins.

Qin G(1), Ma J(1), Chen X(1), Chu Z(2), She YM(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Center for Plant Stress Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 3888 Chenhua Road, Shanghai 201602, P. R. 
China.
(2)Shanghai Chenshan Plant Science Research Center and Shanghai Chenshan Botanic 
Garden, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
3888 Chenhua Road, Shanghai 201602, P. R. China.
(3)Centre for Biologics Evaluation, Biologics and Genetic Therapies Directorate, 
Health Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, K1A 0K9, Canada.

Affinity purification followed by enzymatic digestion and mass spectrometry has
been widely utilized for the sensitive detection of interacting proteins and
protein complexes in various organisms. In plants, the method is technically
challenging due to the low abundance proteins, non-specific binding and
difficulties of eluting interacting proteins from antibody beads. In this report,
we describe a strategy to modify antibodies by reductive methylation of lysines
without affecting their binding properties, followed by on-bead digestion of
bound proteins with endoproteinase Lys-C. By this method, the antibody remains
intact and does not interfere with the downstream identification of interacting
proteins. Non-specific binding proteins were excluded using 14N/15N-metabolic
labeling of wild-type and the transgenic plant counterparts. The method was
employed to identify 12 co-immunoprecipitated protein subunits in Pol V complex
and to discover 17 potential interacting protein targets in Arabidopsis. Our
results demonstrated that the modification of antibodies by reductive
dimethylation can improve the reliability and sensitivity of identifying
low-abundance proteins through on-bead digestion and mass spectrometry. We also
show that coupling this technique with chemical crosslinking enables in-depth
characterization of endogenous protein complexes and the protein-protein
interaction networks including mapping the surface topology and
post-translational modifications of interacting proteins.

DOI: 10.1038/srep42943 
PMCID: PMC5320500
PMID: 28224978  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Genome Biol. 2017 Jan 16;18(1):7. doi: 10.1186/s13059-016-1130-x.

Insights into the design and interpretation of iCLIP experiments.

Haberman N(1)(2), Huppertz I(1)(3)(4), Attig J(1)(2), König J(1)(5), Wang
Z(6)(7), Hauer C(4)(8)(9), Hentze MW(4)(8), Kulozik AE(8)(9), Le Hir H(6)(7),
Curk T(10), Sibley CR(1)(11), Zarnack K(12), Ule J(13)(14).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neuroscience, UCL Institute of Neurology, Queen
Square, London, WC1N 3BG, UK.
(2)The Crick Institute, 1 Midland Road, London, NW1 1AT, UK.
(3)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Francis Crick Avenue, Cambridge, CB2 0QH,
UK.
(4)European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL), Meyerhofstrasse 1, 69117,
Heidelberg, Germany.
(5)Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB), Ackermannweg 4, 55128, Mainz, Germany.
(6)Institut de Biologie de l'ENS (IBENS), 46 rue d'Ulm, Paris, F-75005, France.
(7)CNRS UMR 8197, Paris Cedex 05, 75230, France.
(8)Molecular Medicine Partnership Unit (MMPU), Im Neuenheimer Feld 350, 69120,
Heidelberg, Germany.
(9)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and Immunology, University of
Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 430, 69120, Heidelberg, Germany.
(10)Faculty of Computer and Information Science, University of Ljubljana, Tržaška
cesta 25, 1000, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(11)Division of Brain Sciences, Department of Medicine, Imperial College London, 
London, UK.
(12)Buchmann Institute for Molecular Life Sciences (BMLS), Goethe University
Frankfurt, Max-von-Laue-Str. 15, 60438, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
kathi.zarnack@bmls.de.
(13)Department of Molecular Neuroscience, UCL Institute of Neurology, Queen
Square, London, WC1N 3BG, UK. j.ule@ucl.ac.uk.
(14)The Crick Institute, 1 Midland Road, London, NW1 1AT, UK. j.ule@ucl.ac.uk.

Erratum in
    Genome Biol. 2017 Aug 15;18(1):154.

BACKGROUND: Ultraviolet (UV) crosslinking and immunoprecipitation (CLIP)
identifies the sites on RNAs that are in direct contact with RNA-binding proteins
(RBPs). Several variants of CLIP exist, which require different computational
approaches for analysis. This variety of approaches can create challenges for a
novice user and can hamper insights from multi-study comparisons. Here, we
produce data with multiple variants of CLIP and evaluate the data with various
computational methods to better understand their suitability.
RESULTS: We perform experiments for PTBP1 and eIF4A3 using individual-nucleotide 
resolution CLIP (iCLIP), employing either UV-C or photoactivatable 4-thiouridine 
(4SU) combined with UV-A crosslinking and compare the results with published
data. As previously noted, the positions of complementary DNA (cDNA)-starts
depend on cDNA length in several iCLIP experiments and we now find that this is
caused by constrained cDNA-ends, which can result from the sequence and structure
constraints of RNA fragmentation. These constraints are overcome when
fragmentation by RNase I is efficient and when a broad cDNA size range is
obtained. Our study also shows that if RNase does not efficiently cut within the 
binding sites, the original CLIP method is less capable of identifying the longer
binding sites of RBPs. In contrast, we show that a broad size range of cDNAs in
iCLIP allows the cDNA-starts to efficiently delineate the complete RNA-binding
sites.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrate the advantage of iCLIP and related methods that can
amplify cDNAs that truncate at crosslink sites and we show that computational
analyses based on cDNAs-starts are appropriate for such methods.

DOI: 10.1186/s13059-016-1130-x 
PMCID: PMC5240381
PMID: 28093074  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Fish Physiol Biochem. 2017 Apr;43(2):663-676. doi: 10.1007/s10695-016-0321-4.
Epub 2017 Jan 10.

Identification of low-molecular-weight vitellogenin 1 (Vg1)-like proteins as
nucleotide excision repair (NER) factors in developing zebrafish (Danio rerio)
using a transcription-based DNA repair assay.

Shen YC(1)(2), Hsu T(3), Ling LB(2), You WC(2), Liu CW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Chang Gung
University College of Medicine, Keelung, 204, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Bioscience and Biotechnology and Center of Excellence for the
Oceans, National Taiwan Ocean University, Keelung, 20224, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Bioscience and Biotechnology and Center of Excellence for the
Oceans, National Taiwan Ocean University, Keelung, 20224, Taiwan.
toddhsu@mail.ntou.edu.tw.

Nucleotide excision repair (NER) removes helix-distorting DNA lesions such as
UV-induced pyrimidine dimers and cisplatin-induced strand crosslinking. Our
earlier studies have identified low-molecular-weight proteins homologous to the
150-kDa vitellogenin 1 (Vg1) as UV-damaged DNA-binding factors expressed in
developing zebrafish (Danio rerio). This present study explored if Vg1-like
proteins also participated in NER in zebrafish. Immunoblot analysis of
affinity-captured 12 h post-fertilization (hpf) zebrafish extract proteins showed
a transient binding of a 30-kDa Vg1-like polypeptide to UV-damaged DNA. A
transcription-based in vitro repair assay revealed a significant up-regulation of
UVC or cisplatin-suppressed transcriptional activity of a marker cDNA driven by a
SP6 RNA polymerase-regulated promotor after incubating the damaged plasmid with
the extracts of 12 hpf embryos or 96 hpf larvae. The up-regulation of UV or
cisplatin-suppressed transcription was abolished in the presence of a monoclonal 
anti-zebrafish Vg1 antibody. The differential sensitivity of UV-induced repair in
12 and 96 hpf zebrafish extracts to exogenous ATP suggested a
development-dependent expression of Vg1-like NER factors. A T4 endonuclease V
digestion assay showed no inhibition of the anti-Vg1 antibody on the excision of 
UV-induced cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers. Our results identified the
participation of Vg1-like factors in NER in developing zebrafish, and these
factors may function at post-incison steps of NER.

DOI: 10.1007/s10695-016-0321-4 
PMID: 28074418  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Burns. 2017 May;43(3):520-530. doi: 10.1016/j.burns.2016.10.002. Epub 2016 Dec
29.

Evaluation of cultured human dermal- and dermo-epidermal substitutes focusing on 
extracellular matrix components: Comparison of protein and RNA analysis.

Oostendorp C(1), Meyer S(2), Sobrio M(3), van Arendonk J(4), Reichmann E(5),
Daamen WF(6), van Kuppevelt TH(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences,
Radboud University Medical Center, Geert Grooteplein 28, 6525 GA, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands. Electronic address: Corien.Oostendorp@radboudumc.nl.
(2)Tissue Biology Research Unit, Department of Surgery, Zurich University
Children's Hospital, August Forel Strasse 7, 8008 Zurich, Switzerland.
(3)Tissue Biology Research Unit, Department of Surgery, Zurich University
Children's Hospital, August Forel Strasse 7, 8008 Zurich, Switzerland. Electronic
address: monia.sobrio@kispi.uzh.ch.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences,
Radboud University Medical Center, Geert Grooteplein 28, 6525 GA, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands.
(5)Tissue Biology Research Unit, Department of Surgery, Zurich University
Children's Hospital, August Forel Strasse 7, 8008 Zurich, Switzerland. Electronic
address: ernst.reichmann@kispi.uzh.ch.
(6)Department of Biochemistry, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences,
Radboud University Medical Center, Geert Grooteplein 28, 6525 GA, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands. Electronic address: Willeke.Daamen@radboudumc.nl.
(7)Department of Biochemistry, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences,
Radboud University Medical Center, Geert Grooteplein 28, 6525 GA, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands. Electronic address: Toin.vanKuppevelt@radboudumc.nl.

Treatment of full-thickness skin defects with split-thickness skin grafts is
generally associated with contraction and scar formation and cellular skin
substitutes have been developed to improve skin regeneration. The evaluation of
cultured skin substitutes is generally based on qualitative parameters focusing
on histology. In this study we focused on quantitative evaluation to provide a
template for comparison of human bio-engineered skin substitutes between clinical
and/or research centers, and to supplement histological data. We focused on
extracellular matrix proteins since these components play an important role in
skin regeneration. As a model we analyzed the human dermal substitute denovoDerm 
and the dermo-epidermal skin substitute denovoSkin. The quantification of the
extracellular matrix proteins type III collagen and laminin 5 in tissue
homogenates using western blotting analysis and ELISA was not successful. The
same was true for assaying lysyl oxidase, an enzyme involved in crosslinking of
matrix molecules. As an alternative, gene expression levels were measured using
qPCR. Various RNA isolation procedures were probed. The gene expression profile
for specific dermal and epidermal genes could be measured reliably and
reproducibly. Differences caused by changes in the cell culture conditions could 
easily be detected. The number of cells in the skin substitutes was measured
using the PicoGreen dsDNA assay, which was found highly quantitative and
reproducible. The (dis) advantages of assays used for quantitative evaluation of 
skin substitutes are discussed.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd and ISBI. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.burns.2016.10.002 
PMID: 28041746  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Nucleic Acids Res. 2017 Feb 28;45(4):1848-1859. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkw1209.

SFPQ•NONO and XLF function separately and together to promote DNA double-strand
break repair via canonical nonhomologous end joining.

Jaafar L(1), Li Z(1), Li S(1), Dynan WS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Radiation Oncology and Biochemistry, Emory University, Atlanta,
GA 30322, USA.

A complex of two related mammalian proteins, SFPQ and NONO, promotes DNA
double-strand break repair via the canonical nonhomologous end joining (c-NHEJ)
pathway. However, its mechanism of action is not fully understood. Here we
describe an improved SFPQ•NONO-dependent in vitro end joining assay. We use this 
system to demonstrate that the SFPQ•NONO complex substitutes in vitro for the
core c-NHEJ factor, XLF. Results are consistent with a model where SFPQ•NONO
promotes sequence-independent pairing of DNA substrates, albeit in a way that
differs in detail from XLF. Although SFPQ•NONO and XLF function redundantly in
vitro, shRNA-mediated knockdown experiments indicate that NONO and XLF are both
required for efficient end joining and radioresistance in cell-based assays. In
addition, knockdown of NONO sensitizes cells to the interstrand crosslinking
agent, cisplatin, whereas knockdown of XLF does not, and indeed suppresses the
effect of NONO deficiency. These findings suggest that each protein has one or
more unique activities, in addition to the DNA pairing revealed in vitro, that
contribute to DNA repair in the more complex cellular milieu. The SFPQ•NONO
complex contains an RNA binding domain, and prior work has demonstrated diverse
roles in RNA metabolism. It is thus plausible that the additional repair function
of NONO, revealed in cell-based assays, could involve RNA interaction.

© The Author(s) 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkw1209 
PMCID: PMC5605232
PMID: 27924002  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Cell. 2016 Nov 17;167(5):1201-1214.e15. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2016.10.048.

The Chromatin Remodeler ISW1 Is a Quality Control Factor that Surveys Nuclear
mRNP Biogenesis.

Babour A(1), Shen Q(2), Dos-Santos J(2), Murray S(3), Gay A(2), Challal D(4),
Fasken M(5), Palancade B(4), Corbett A(5), Libri D(4), Mellor J(3), Dargemont
C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Université Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, INSERM UMR944, CNRS UMR7212,
Hôpital St. Louis 1, Avenue Claude Vellefaux, 75475 Paris Cedex, France.
Electronic address: anna.babour@inserm.fr.
(2)Université Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, INSERM UMR944, CNRS UMR7212,
Hôpital St. Louis 1, Avenue Claude Vellefaux, 75475 Paris Cedex, France.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1
3QU, UK.
(4)Institut Jacques Monod, Université Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, CNRS,
Bâtiment Buffon, 15 rue Hélène Brion, 75205 Paris Cedex, France.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA
30322, USA.

Comment in
    Nucleus. 2017 Sep 3;8(5):482-488.

Chromatin dynamics play an essential role in regulating DNA transaction
processes, but it is unclear whether transcription-associated chromatin
modifications control the mRNA ribonucleoparticles (mRNPs) pipeline from
synthesis to nuclear exit. Here, we identify the yeast ISW1 chromatin remodeling 
complex as an unanticipated mRNP nuclear export surveillance factor that retains 
export-incompetent transcripts near their transcription site. This tethering
activity of ISW1 requires chromatin binding and is independent of nucleosome
sliding activity or changes in RNA polymerase II processivity. Combination of
in vivo UV-crosslinking and genome-wide RNA immunoprecipitation assays show that 
Isw1 and its cofactors interact directly with premature mRNPs. Our results
highlight that the concerted action of Isw1 and the nuclear exosome ensures
accurate surveillance mechanism that proofreads the efficiency of mRNA
biogenesis.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2016.10.048 
PMID: 27863241  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2016 Dec 15;26(24):5902-5906. doi:
10.1016/j.bmcl.2016.11.002. Epub 2016 Nov 9.

Synthesis of peptide nucleic acids (PNA) with a crosslinking agent to RNA and
effective inhibition of dicer.

Akisawa T(1), Yamada K(1), Nagatsugi F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Multidisciplinary Research for Advanced Materials, Tohoku
University, 2-1-1 Katahira, Aoba-ku, Sendai-shi, Miyagi 980-8577, Japan.
(2)Institute of Multidisciplinary Research for Advanced Materials, Tohoku
University, 2-1-1 Katahira, Aoba-ku, Sendai-shi, Miyagi 980-8577, Japan.
Electronic address: nagatugi@tagen.tohoku.ac.jp.

Peptide nucleic acids (PNAs) are structural mimics of nucleic acids that form
stable hybrids with DNA and RNA. Due to these characteristics, PNAs are widely
used as biochemical tools, for example, in antisense/antigene therapy. In this
study, we have synthesized PNAs incorporating 2-amino-6-vinylpurine (AVP) for the
covalent targeting of single-stranded DNA and RNA, and evaluated their
reactivities for these targets. PNA containing AVP at the N-terminal position
showed a high reactivity to uracil in RNA and thymine in DNA at the complementary
site with AVP. In addition, the crosslinking reactions to pre-miR122 with PNA
containing AVP increased the inhibition effect for the Dicer processing of
pre-miR122 in vitro.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2016.11.002 
PMID: 27838183  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


57. EMBO J. 2017 Feb 1;36(3):374-387. doi: 10.15252/embj.201694639. Epub 2016 Nov 11.

Small RNA interactome of pathogenic E. coli revealed through crosslinking of
RNase E.

Waters SA(1), McAteer SP(2), Kudla G(3), Pang I(1)(4), Deshpande NP(1)(4), Amos
TG(1), Leong KW(5), Wilkins MR(1)(4), Strugnell R(5), Gally DL(2), Tollervey
D(6), Tree JJ(7).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, University of New South
Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(2)The Roslin Institute, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(3)MRC Human Genetic Unit, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(4)Systems Biology Initiative, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW,
Australia.
(5)Peter Doherty Institute, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia.
(6)Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
j.tree@unsw.edu.au d.tollervey@ed.ac.uk.
(7)School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, University of New South
Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia j.tree@unsw.edu.au d.tollervey@ed.ac.uk.

Comment in
    EMBO J. 2017 Feb 1;36(3):245-247.

RNA sequencing studies have identified hundreds of non-coding RNAs in bacteria,
including regulatory small RNA (sRNA). However, our understanding of sRNA
function has lagged behind their identification due to a lack of tools for the
high-throughput analysis of RNA-RNA interactions in bacteria. Here we demonstrate
that in vivo sRNA-mRNA duplexes can be recovered using UV-crosslinking, ligation 
and sequencing of hybrids (CLASH). Many sRNAs recruit the endoribonuclease, RNase
E, to facilitate processing of mRNAs. We were able to recover base-paired
sRNA-mRNA duplexes in association with RNase E, allowing proximity-dependent
ligation and sequencing of cognate sRNA-mRNA pairs as chimeric reads. We verified
that this approach captures bona fide sRNA-mRNA interactions. Clustering analyses
identified novel sRNA seed regions and sets of potentially co-regulated target
mRNAs. We identified multiple mRNA targets for the pathotype-specific sRNA Esr41,
which was shown to regulate colicin sensitivity and iron transport in E. coli
Numerous sRNA interactions were also identified with non-coding RNAs, including
sRNAs and tRNAs, demonstrating the high complexity of the sRNA interactome.

© 2016 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license.

DOI: 10.15252/embj.201694639 
PMCID: PMC5286369
PMID: 27836995  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Acta Biomater. 2016 Nov;45:210-222. doi: 10.1016/j.actbio.2016.08.056. Epub 2016 
Sep 2.

Microparticulate poly(vinyl alcohol) hydrogel formulations for embedding and
controlled release of polyethylenimine (PEI)-based nanoparticles.

Schulze J(1), Hendrikx S(2), Schulz-Siegmund M(2), Aigner A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Rudolf Boehm-Institute for Pharmacology and Toxicology, Clinical Pharmacology,
University of Leipzig, Germany.
(2)Pharmaceutical Technology, Institute of Pharmacy, University of Leipzig,
Germany.
(3)Rudolf Boehm-Institute for Pharmacology and Toxicology, Clinical Pharmacology,
University of Leipzig, Germany. Electronic address:
achim.aigner@medizin.uni-leipzig.de.

Nucleic acid-based therapeutics offer enormous potential in the treatment of
various pathologies. For DNA or RNA delivery, nanoparticle systems based on
lipids or polymers have been developed. However, colloidal instability in
solution, poor storage properties especially as dry powder and little stability
against an aggressive environment, e.g. after oral application, are major issues.
Furthermore, there is an urgent need for sustained release systems that allow for
fine-tuned, long-term temporal and spatial nanoparticle release. In this paper,
we describe the embedding of polymeric nanoparticles for gene delivery, namely
polyethylenimine (PEI)-based polyplexes and their corresponding liposome-modified
analogues (lipopolyplexes), into microparticulate poly (vinyl alcohol) (PVA)
hydrogels. Various parameters are modified, and major differences are found. PVA 
is explored with two different molecular weights and at different concentrations,
furthermore different emulsifiers and acetone for extraction are employed, and
the protocol is performed with or without repetitive freeze/thaw cycles for
physical PVA crosslinking. We thereby establish Nanoparticles-in-Microparticle
Delivery Systems (NiMDS) that are extensively characterized and shown to allow
prolonged storage as easy-to-handle formulation (dry powder) without loss of
nanoparticle activity. Unexpectedly, the nanoparticles' PVA encapsulation/release
alters important physicochemical nanoparticle properties and biological
activities in a favourable way. Furthermore, we also demonstrate the nanoparticle
release to be dependent on the microstructure of the PVA matrix, which is
determined by the degree of physical crosslinking through a defined number of
freeze/thaw cycles. We show that these defined physically crosslinked PVA
hydrogels thus represent sustained release devices for fine-tuned, long-term
nanoparticle release in possible therapeutic applications.STATEMENT OF
SIGNIFICANCE: The present paper for the first time describes the embedding of
polymeric PEI-based polyplexes and lipopolyplexes into poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) 
hydrogels, to establish novel Nanoparticles-in-Microparticle Delivery Systems
(NiMDS). Through modification of various parameters including different PVA
molecular weights and concentrations, different emulsifiers and defined numbers
of freeze-thaw cycles for physical PVA crosslinking, sustained release devices
are also obtained. Beyond favourable alterations of important
physicochemical/biological nanoparticle properties and the possibility for
prolonged storage as easy-to-handle formulation (dry powder), we show that these 
NiMDS also allow the tailormade, fine-tuned, long-term release of fully active
nanoparticles in possible therapeutic applications.

Copyright © 2016 Acta Materialia Inc. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actbio.2016.08.056 
PMID: 27592816  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Elife. 2016 Oct 4;5. pii: e18096. doi: 10.7554/eLife.18096.

NusG inhibits RNA polymerase backtracking by stabilizing the minimal
transcription bubble.

Turtola M(1), Belogurov GA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Turku, Turku, Finland.

Universally conserved factors from NusG family bind at the upstream fork junction
of transcription elongation complexes and modulate RNA synthesis in response to
translation, processing, and folding of the nascent RNA. Escherichia coli NusG
enhances transcription elongation in vitro by a poorly understood mechanism. Here
we report that E. coli NusG slows Gre factor-stimulated cleavage of the nascent
RNA, but does not measurably change the rates of single nucleotide addition and
translocation by a non-paused RNA polymerase. We demonstrate that NusG slows RNA 
cleavage by inhibiting backtracking. This activity is abolished by mismatches in 
the upstream DNA and is independent of the gate and rudder loops, but is
partially dependent on the lid loop. Our comprehensive mapping of the upstream
fork junction by base analogue fluorescence and nucleic acids crosslinking
suggests that NusG inhibits backtracking by stabilizing the minimal transcription
bubble.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.18096 
PMCID: PMC5100998
PMID: 27697152  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that no competing interests
exist.


60. Chem Pharm Bull (Tokyo). 2016;64(9):1315-20. doi: 10.1248/cpb.c16-00310.

Efficient Thymidine-Selective DNA Interstrand Photo-activated Crosslinking by the
6-Thioguanine Connected via an Ethylene-Linker to the 2'-Deoxyribose Unit.

Nishioka T(1), Oshiro I, Onizuka K, Taniguchi Y, Sasaki S.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyushu University.

Cross-linking is a widely-used technology in the studies of DNA, RNA and their
complexes with proteins. Intrinsically active alkylating moieties and
photo-activated agents are chemically or enzymatically incorporated into nucleic 
acids. Thionucleobases resemble the corresponding natural bases, and form
cross-links by UVA irradiation. They form cross-links only with a site in close
contact, thereby allowing identification of the contacts within the nucleic acids
and/or between the nucleic acids and proteins in complex nucleoprotein
assemblies. On the other hand, the thionucleobase forms a cross-link less
efficiently for the reaction with the opposite natural base in the DNA duplex. In
this study, 6-thioguanine was connected to 2'-deoxyribose through an ethylene
linker at the 1'-position (Et-thioG). The linker was expected to bring the 6-thio
group close to the nucleobase in the opposite strand. In a duplex in which the
2'-deoxy-6-thioguanosine (6-thio-dG) did not form a crosslink, Et-thioG
efficiently formed crosslink with a high selectivity for T by UVA irradiation,
but with a much lower efficiency for dA, dG, dC, 5-methyl-dC or dU.
Interestingly, the yield of the photo-crosslinked product with dT was effectively
improved in the presence of dithiothreitol or sodium hydrosulfide (NaSH) at a low
UVA irradiation dose. The efficient and selective cross-link formation at a low
UVA dose may be beneficial for the biological application of Et-thioG.

DOI: 10.1248/cpb.c16-00310 
PMID: 27581636  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Leukemia. 2017 Feb;31(2):423-433. doi: 10.1038/leu.2016.242. Epub 2016 Aug 29.

The immune receptor Trem1 cooperates with diminished DNA damage response to
induce preleukemic stem cell expansion.

Du W(1)(2), Amarachintha S(1), Wilson A(1), Pang Q(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Hematology and Cancer Biology, Cincinnati Children's 
Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(2)Divisions of Radiation Health, Department of Pharmaceutical Science, College
of Pharmacy, UAMS, Little Rock, AR, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine,
Cincinnati, OH, USA.

Fanconi anemia (FA) is an inherited bone marrow failure syndrome with extremely
high risk of leukemic transformation. Here we investigate the relationship
between DNA damage response (DDR) and leukemogenesis using the Fanca knockout
mouse model. We found that chronic exposure of the Fanca-/- hematopoietic stem
cells to DNA crosslinking agent mitomycin C in vivo leads to diminished DDR, and 
the emergence/expansion of pre-leukemia stem cells (pre-LSCs). Surprisingly,
although genetic correction of Fanca deficiency in the pre-LSCs restores DDR and 
reduces genomic instability, but fails to prevent pre-LSC expansion or delay
leukemia development in irradiated recipients. Furthermore, we identified
transcription program underlying dysregulated DDR and cell migration, myeloid
proliferation, and immune response in the Fanca-/- pre-LSCs. Forced expression of
the downregulated DNA repair genes, Rad51c or Trp53i13, in the Fanca-/- pre-LSCs 
partially rescues DDR but has no effect on leukemia, whereas shRNA knockdown of
the upregulated immune receptor genes Trem1 or Pilrb improves leukemia-related
survival, but not DDR or genomic instability. Furthermore, Trem1 cooperates with 
diminished DDR in vivo to promote Fanca-/- pre-LSC expansion and leukemia
development. Our study implicates diminishing DDR as a root cause of FA
leukemogenesis, which subsequently collaborates with other signaling pathways for
leukemogenic transformation.

DOI: 10.1038/leu.2016.242 
PMID: 27568523  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


62. PLoS One. 2016 Aug 23;11(8):e0161588. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0161588.
eCollection 2016.

Discovery of a Family of Genomic Sequences Which Interact Specifically with the
c-MYC Promoter to Regulate c-MYC Expression.

Rezzoug F(1), Thomas SD(1), Rouchka EC(2), Miller DM(1).

Author information: 
(1)James Graham Brown Cancer Center, Department of Medicine, University of
Louisville, Louisville Kentucky, United States of America.
(2)Department of Computer Engineering and Computer Science, Speed School of
Engineering, University of Louisville, Kentucky, United States of America.

G-quadruplex forming sequences are particularly enriched in the promoter regions 
of eukaryotic genes, especially of oncogenes. One of the most well studied
G-quadruplex forming sequences is located in the nuclease hypersensitive element 
(NHE) III1 of the c-MYC promoter region. The oncoprotein c-MYC regulates a large 
array of genes which play important roles in growth regulation and metabolism. It
is dysregulated in >70% of human cancers. The silencer NHEIII1 located upstream
of the P1 promoter regulates up-to 80% of c-MYC transcription and includes a
G-quadruplex structure (Pu27) that is required for promoter inhibition. We have
identified, for the first time, a family of seventeen G-quadruplex-forming motifs
with >90% identity with Pu27, located on different chromosomes throughout the
human genome, some found near or within genes involved in stem cell maintenance
or neural cell development. Notably, all members of the Pu27 family interact
specifically with NHEIII1 sequence, in vitro. Crosslinking studies demonstrate
that Pu27 oligonucleotide binds specifically to the C-rich strand of the NHEIII1 
resulting in the G-quadruplex structure stabilization. Pu27 homologous sequences 
(Pu27-HS) significantly inhibit leukemic cell lines proliferation in culture.
Exposure of U937 cells to the Pu27-HS induces cell growth inhibition associated
with cell cycle arrest that is most likely due to downregulation of c-MYC
expression at the RNA and/or protein levels. Expression of SOX2, another gene
containing a Pu27-HS, was affected by Pu27-HS treatment as well. Our data suggest
that the oligonucleotides encoding the Pu27 family target complementary DNA
sequences in the genome, including those of the c-MYC and SOX2 promoters. This
effect is most likely cell type and cell growth condition dependent. The presence
of genomic G-quadruplex-forming sequences homologous to Pu27 of c-MYC silencer
and the fact that they interact specifically with the parent sequence suggest a
common regulatory mechanism for genes whose promoters contain these sequences.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0161588 
PMCID: PMC4995011
PMID: 27551915  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.


63. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2016 Aug;15(8):2699-714. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M115.056564. Epub 
2016 Jun 8.

Identification of RNA-binding Proteins in Macrophages by Interactome Capture.

Liepelt A(1), Naarmann-de Vries IS(1), Simons N(1), Eichelbaum K(2), Föhr S(2),
Archer SK(3), Castello A(2), Usadel B(4), Krijgsveld J(2), Preiss T(5), Marx
G(1), Hentze MW(2), Ostareck DH(6), Ostareck-Lederer A(6).

Author information: 
(1)From the ‡Department of Intensive Care and Intermediate Care, University
Hospital RWTH Aachen, Pauwelsstr. 30, 52074 Aachen, Germany;
(2)§European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL), Meyerhofstr. 1, 69117
Heidelberg, Germany;
(3)¶EMBL-Australia Collaborating Group, Department of Genome Sciences, The John
Curtin School of Medical Research, The Australian National University, Garran Rd,
Acton (Canberra) ACT 2601, Australia;
(4)‖Institute of Biology I, RWTH Aachen, Worringer Weg 2, 52074 Aachen, Germany;
(5)¶EMBL-Australia Collaborating Group, Department of Genome Sciences, The John
Curtin School of Medical Research, The Australian National University, Garran Rd,
Acton (Canberra) ACT 2601, Australia; **Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute, 
Darlinghurst (Sydney), New South Wales 2010, Australia.
(6)From the ‡Department of Intensive Care and Intermediate Care, University
Hospital RWTH Aachen, Pauwelsstr. 30, 52074 Aachen, Germany;
aostareck@ukaachen.de dostareck@ukaachen.de.

Pathogen components, such as lipopolysaccharides of Gram-negative bacteria that
activate Toll-like receptor 4, induce mitogen activated protein kinases and NFκB 
through different downstream pathways to stimulate pro- and anti-inflammatory
cytokine expression. Importantly, post-transcriptional control of the expression 
of Toll-like receptor 4 downstream signaling molecules contributes to the tight
regulation of inflammatory cytokine synthesis in macrophages. Emerging evidence
highlights the role of RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) in the post-transcriptional
control of the innate immune response. To systematically identify macrophage RBPs
and their response to LPS stimulation, we employed RNA interactome capture in
LPS-induced and untreated murine RAW 264.7 macrophages. This combines
RBP-crosslinking to RNA, cell lysis, oligo(dT) capture of polyadenylated RNAs and
mass spectrometry analysis of associated proteins. Our data revealed 402 proteins
of the macrophage RNA interactome including 91 previously not annotated as RBPs. 
A comparison with published RNA interactomes classified 32 RBPs uniquely
identified in RAW 264.7 macrophages. Of these, 19 proteins are linked to
biochemical activities not directly related to RNA. From this group, we validated
the HSP90 cochaperone P23 that was demonstrated to exhibit cytosolic
prostaglandin E2 synthase 3 (PTGES3) activity, and the hematopoietic
cell-specific LYN substrate 1 (HCLS1 or HS1), a hematopoietic cell-specific
adapter molecule, as novel macrophage RBPs. Our study expands the mammalian RBP
repertoire, and identifies macrophage RBPs that respond to LPS. These RBPs are
prime candidates for the post-transcriptional regulation and execution of
LPS-induced signaling pathways and the innate immune response. Macrophage RBP
data have been deposited to ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002890.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/mcp.M115.056564 
PMCID: PMC4974345
PMID: 27281784  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Acta Biomater. 2016 Sep 1;41:282-92. doi: 10.1016/j.actbio.2016.06.006. Epub 2016
Jun 3.

Well-defined reducible cationic nanogels based on functionalized
low-molecular-weight PGMA for effective pDNA and siRNA delivery.

Li RQ(1), Wu W(2), Song HQ(1), Ren Y(3), Yang M(3), Li J(4), Xu FJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Chemical Resource Engineering, Beijing University of
Chemical Technology, Beijing 100029, China; Key Laboratory of Carbon Fiber and
Functional Polymers (Beijing University of Chemical Technology), Ministry of
Education, Beijing 100029, China; Beijing Laboratory of Biomedical Materials,
Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing 100029, China.
(2)College of Polymer Science and Engineering, State Key Laboratory of Polymer
Materials Engineering, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610065, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Chemical Resource Engineering, Beijing University of
Chemical Technology, Beijing 100029, China.
(4)College of Polymer Science and Engineering, State Key Laboratory of Polymer
Materials Engineering, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610065, China. Electronic
address: jianshu_li@scu.edu.cn.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Chemical Resource Engineering, Beijing University of
Chemical Technology, Beijing 100029, China; Key Laboratory of Carbon Fiber and
Functional Polymers (Beijing University of Chemical Technology), Ministry of
Education, Beijing 100029, China; Beijing Laboratory of Biomedical Materials,
Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing 100029, China. Electronic
address: xufj@mail.buct.edu.cn.

Nucleic acid-based gene therapy is a promising treatment option to cure numerous 
intractable diseases. For non-viral gene carriers, low-molecular-weight polymeric
vectors generally demonstrate poor transfection performance, but benefit their
final removals from the body. Recently, it was reported that aminated
poly(glycidyl methacrylate) (PGMA) is one potential gene vector. Based on
ethylenediamine (ED)-functionalized low-molecular-weight PGMA (denoted by PGED), 
a flexible strategy was herein proposed to design new well-defined reducible
cationic nanogels (denoted by PGED-NGs) with friendly crosslinking reagents for
highly efficient nucleic acid delivery. α-Lipoic acid (LA), one natural
antioxidant in human body, was readily introduced into ED-functionalized PGMA and
crosslinked to produce cationic PGED-NGs with plentiful reducible lipoyl groups. 
PGED-NGs could effectively complex plasmid DNA (pDNA) and short interfering RNA
(siRNA). Compared with pristine PGED, PGED-NGs exhibited much better performance 
of pDNA transfection. PGED-NGs also could efficiently transport MALAT1 siRNA
(siR-M) into hepatoma cells and significantly suppressed the cancer cell
proliferation and migration. The present work indicated that reducible cationic
nanogels involving LA crosslinking reagents are one kind of competitive
candidates for high-performance nucleic acid delivery systems.STATEMENT OF
SIGNIFICANCE: Recently, the design of new types of high-performance nanoparticles
is of great significance in delivering therapeutics. Nucleic acid-based therapy
is a promising treatment option to cure numerous intractable diseases. A facile
and straightforward strategy to fabricate safe nucleic acid delivery nanovectors 
is highly desirable. In this work, based on ethylenediamine-functionalized
low-molecular-weight poly(glycidyl methacrylate), a flexible strategy was
proposed to design new well-defined reducible cationic nanogels (denoted by
PGED-NGs) with α-Lipoic acid, one friendly crosslinking reagent, for highly
efficient nucleic acid delivery. Such PGED-NGs possess plentiful reducible lipoyl
groups, effectively encapsulated pDNA and siRNA and exhibited excellent abilities
of nucleic acid delivery. The present work indicated that reducible cationic
nanogels involving α-lipoic acid crosslinking reagents are one kind of
competitive candidates for high-performance nucleic acid delivery systems.

Copyright © 2016 Acta Materialia Inc. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actbio.2016.06.006 
PMID: 27267781  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Curr Protoc Microbiol. 2016 May 6;41:14B.7.1-14B.7.20. doi: 10.1002/cpmc.6.

Detection of Papillomavirus Gene Expression Patterns in Tissue Sections.

Griffin H(1), Doorbar J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

Molecular events during the papillomavirus life cycle can be mapped in infected
tissue biopsies using antibodies to viral and cellular gene products, or by in
situ hybridization approaches that detect viral DNA or viral transcription
products. For proteins, ease of immunodetection depends on antibody specificity
and antigen availability. Epitopes in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE)
samples are often masked by crosslinking and must be exposed for immunodetection.
RNA in FFPE material is often degraded, and such tissue must be handled carefully
to optimize detection. Viral proteins and viral genomic DNA are both well
preserved in routinely processed FFPE samples, with sensitive detection
methodologies allowing the simultaneous detection of multiple markers. The
combined visualization of nucleic acid and (viral) protein targets, when coupled 
with image analysis approaches that allow correlation with standard pathology
diagnosis, have allowed us to understand the molecular changes required for
normal HPV life-cycle organization as well as deregulation during cancer
progression. © 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Copyright © 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/cpmc.6 
PMID: 27153382  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


66. BMC Genomics. 2016 May 5;17:338. doi: 10.1186/s12864-016-2675-5.

Improvements to the HITS-CLIP protocol eliminate widespread mispriming artifacts.

Gillen AE(1), Yamamoto TM(2), Kline E(2)(3), Hesselberth JR(4), Kabos P(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Colorado Denver, Aurora, CO, USA.
austin.gillen@ucdenver.edu.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Colorado Denver, Aurora, CO, USA.
(3)Present Address: Department of Bioengineering, University of Washington,
Seattle, WA, USA.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Colorado
Denver, Aurora, CO, USA.
(5)Department of Medicine, University of Colorado Denver, Aurora, CO, USA.
peter.kabos@ucdenver.edu.

BACKGROUND: High-throughput sequencing of RNA isolated by crosslinking
immunoprecipitation (HITS-CLIP) allows for high resolution, genome-wide mapping
of RNA-binding proteins. This methodology is frequently used to validate
predicted targets of microRNA binding, as well as direct targets of other
RNA-binding proteins. Hence, the accuracy and sensitivity of binding site
identification is critical.
RESULTS: We found that substantial mispriming during reverse transcription
results in the overrepresentation of sequences complementary to the primer used
for reverse transcription. Up to 45 % of peaks in publicly available HITS-CLIP
libraries are attributable to this mispriming artifact, and the majority of
libraries have detectable levels of mispriming. We also found that standard
techniques for validating microRNA-target interactions fail to differentiate
between artifactual peaks and physiologically relevant peaks.
CONCLUSIONS: Here, we present a modification to the HITS-CLIP protocol that
effectively eliminates this artifact and improves the sensitivity and complexity 
of resulting libraries.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-016-2675-5 
PMCID: PMC4858895
PMID: 27150721  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Nat Methods. 2016 Jun;13(6):489-92. doi: 10.1038/nmeth.3840. Epub 2016 Apr 25.

irCLIP platform for efficient characterization of protein-RNA interactions.

Zarnegar BJ(1), Flynn RA(1)(2), Shen Y(1), Do BT(1)(2), Chang HY(1)(2), Khavari
PA(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Epithelial Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, California, USA.
(2)Center for Personal Dynamic Regulomes, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, California, USA.
(3)Veterans Affairs, Palo Alto Healthcare System, Palo Alto, California, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Methods. 2016 May 31;13(6):482-3.
    Mol Cell. 2016 Jun 2;62(5):650-1.

The complexity of transcriptome-wide protein-RNA interaction networks is
incompletely understood. While emerging studies are greatly expanding the known
universe of RNA-binding proteins, methods for the discovery and characterization 
of protein-RNA interactions remain resource intensive and technically
challenging. Here we introduce a UV-C crosslinking and immunoprecipitation
platform, irCLIP, which provides an ultraefficient, fast, and nonisotopic method 
for the detection of protein-RNA interactions using far less material than
standard protocols.

DOI: 10.1038/nmeth.3840 
PMCID: PMC5477425
PMID: 27111506  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Sci Rep. 2016 Apr 20;6:24712. doi: 10.1038/srep24712.

Chromatin folding and DNA replication inhibition mediated by a highly
antitumor-active tetrazolato-bridged dinuclear platinum(II) complex.

Imai R(1)(2), Komeda S(3), Shimura M(4)(5)(6), Tamura S(1)(4), Matsuyama
S(4)(6)(7), Nishimura K(8), Rogge R(9), Matsunaga A(4)(5)(6), Hiratani
I(1)(2)(10), Takata H(1)(11), Uemura M(3), Iida Y(12), Yoshikawa Y(13), Hansen
JC(9), Yamauchi K(4)(6)(7), Kanemaki MT(2)(8)(14), Maeshima K(1)(2)(4)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Biological Macromolecules Laboratory, Structural Biology Center, National
Institute of Genetics, Mishima, Shizuoka 411-8540, Japan.
(2)Department of Genetics, School of Life Science, Sokendai (Graduate University 
for Advanced Studies), Mishima, Shizuoka 411-8540, Japan.
(3)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Suzuka University of Medical Science,
Suzuka, Mie, 513-8670.
(4)CREST, JST, 4-1-8 Honcho, Kawaguchi, Saitama 332-0012, Japan.
(5)Department of Intractable Diseases, Research Institute, National Center for
Global Health and Medicine, Shinjuku, Tokyo 162-8655, Japan.
(6)RIKEN SPring-8 Center, 1-1-1 Kouto, Sayo-cho, Sayo-gun, Hyogo 679-5148, Japan.
(7)Department of Precision Science &Technology, Graduate School of Engineering,
Osaka University, 2-1 Yamada-oka Suita, Osaka, Japan 565-0871.
(8)Center for Frontier Research, National Institute of Genetics, Yata 1111,
Mishima, Shizuoka 411-8540, Japan.
(9)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Colorado State University,
Fort Collins, CO 80523, USA.
(10)Laboratory for Developmental Epigenetics, RIKEN Center for Developmental
Biology, Kobe 650-0047, Japan.
(11)Frontier Research Base for Global Young Researchers, Graduate School of
Engineering Osaka University, 2-1 Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.
(12)Inorganic Analysis Laboratories, Toray Research Center, Inc., 3-3-7,
Sonoyama, Otsu, Shiga 520-8567, Japan.
(13)Research Organization of Science and Engineering, Ritsumeikan University,
Kusatsu, Shiga 525-8577, Japan.
(14)PRESTO, JST, 4-1-8 Honcho, Kawaguchi, Saitama 332-0012, Japan.

Chromatin DNA must be read out for various cellular functions, and copied for the
next cell division. These processes are targets of many anticancer agents.
Platinum-based drugs, such as cisplatin, have been used extensively in cancer
chemotherapy. The drug-DNA interaction causes DNA crosslinks and subsequent
cytotoxicity. Recently, it was reported that an azolato-bridged dinuclear
platinum(II) complex, 5-H-Y, exhibits a different anticancer spectrum from
cisplatin. Here, using an interdisciplinary approach, we reveal that the
cytotoxic mechanism of 5-H-Y is distinct from that of cisplatin. 5-H-Y inhibits
DNA replication and also RNA transcription, arresting cells in the S/G2 phase,
and are effective against cisplatin-resistant cancer cells. Moreover, it causes
much less DNA crosslinking than cisplatin, and induces chromatin folding. 5-H-Y
will expand the clinical applications for the treatment of
chemotherapy-insensitive cancers.

DOI: 10.1038/srep24712 
PMCID: PMC4837362
PMID: 27094881  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Oncotarget. 2016 May 31;7(22):32351-61. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.8707.

BLM promotes the activation of Fanconi Anemia signaling pathway.

Panneerselvam J(1), Wang H(2)(3), Zhang J(2), Che R(1), Yu H(1), Fei P(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Hawaii Cancer Center, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI, USA.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN,
USA.
(3)Current address: Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China.

Mutations in the human RecQ helicase, BLM, causes Bloom Syndrome, which is a rare
autosomal recessive disorder and characterized by genomic instability and an
increased risk of cancer. Fanconi Anemia (FA), resulting from mutations in any of
the 19 known FA genes and those yet to be known, is also characterized by
chromosomal instability and a high incidence of cancer. BLM helicase and FA
proteins, therefore, may work in a common tumor-suppressor signaling pathway. To 
date, it remains largely unclear as to how BLM and FA proteins work concurrently 
in the maintenance of genome stability. Here we report that BLM is involved in
the early activation of FA group D2 protein (FANCD2). We found that FANCD2
activation is substantially delayed and attenuated in crosslinking agent-treated 
cells harboring deficient Blm compared to similarly treated control cells with
sufficient BLM. We also identified that the domain VI of BLM plays an essential
role in promoting FANCD2 activation in cells treated with DNA crosslinking
agents, especially ultraviolet B. The similar biological effects performed by
ΔVI-BLM and inactivated FANCD2 further confirm the relationship between BLM and
FANCD2. Mutations within the domain VI of BLM detected in human cancer samples
demonstrate the functional importance of this domain, suggesting human
tumorigenicity resulting from mtBLM may be at least partly attributed to
mitigated FANCD2 activation. Collectively, our data show a previously unknown
regulatory liaison in advancing our understanding of how the cancer
susceptibility gene products act in concert to maintain genome stability.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.8707 
PMCID: PMC5078018
PMID: 27083049  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts
of interest.


70. Cell Death Dis. 2016 Mar 31;7:e2163. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2016.14.

Renal cell carcinoma escapes death by p53 depletion through transglutaminase
2-chaperoned autophagy.

Kang JH(1), Lee JS(1), Hong D(2), Lee SH(1), Kim N(1)(3), Lee WK(4), Sung TW(1), 
Gong YD(3), Kim SY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Cell and Molecular Biology Branch, Research Institute, National Cancer 
Center, Goyang, Republic of Korea.
(2)Cancer Immunology Branch, Division of Cancer Biology, Research Institute,
National Cancer Center, Goyang, Republic of Korea.
(3)Center for Innovative Drug Library Research, Dongguk University, Seoul, Korea.
(4)Institute of Life Science and Natural Resources, Korea University, Seoul,
Republic of Korea.

In renal cell carcinoma, transglutaminase 2 (TGase 2) crosslinks p53 in
autophagosomes, resulting in p53 depletion and the tumor's evasion of apoptosis. 
Inhibition of TGase 2 stabilizes p53 and induces tumor cells to enter apoptosis. 
This study explored the mechanism of TGase 2-dependent p53 degradation. We found 
that TGase 2 competes with human double minute 2 homolog (HDM2) for binding to
p53; promotes autophagy-dependent p53 degradation in renal cell carcinoma (RCC)
cell lines under starvation; and binds to p53 and p62 simultaneously without
ubiquitin-dependent recognition of p62. The bound complex does not have
crosslinking activity. A binding assay using a series of deletion mutants of p62,
p53 and TGase 2 revealed that the PB1 (Phox and Bem1p-1) domain of p62 (residues 
85-110) directly interacts with the β-barrel domains of TGase 2 (residues
592-687), whereas the HDM2-binding domain (transactivation domain, residues
15-26) of p53 interacts with the N terminus of TGase 2 (residues 1-139). In
addition to the increase in p53 stability due to TGase 2 inhibition, the
administration of a DNA-damaging anti-cancer drug such as doxorubicin-induced
apoptosis in RCC cell lines and synergistically reduced tumor volume in a
xenograft model. Combination therapy with a TGase 2 inhibitor and a DNA-damaging 
agent may represent an effective therapeutic approach for treating RCC.

DOI: 10.1038/cddis.2016.14 
PMCID: PMC4823929
PMID: 27031960  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Methods Mol Biol. 2016;1421:137-51. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-3591-8_12.

Genome-Wide Profiling of RNA-Protein Interactions Using CLIP-Seq.

Stork C(1), Zheng S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biomedical Sciences, School of Medicine, University of California 
at Riverside, 201 SOMRB, 900 University Avenue, Riverside, CA, 92521, USA.
(2)Division of Biomedical Sciences, School of Medicine, University of California 
at Riverside, 201 SOMRB, 900 University Avenue, Riverside, CA, 92521, USA.
sika.zheng@ucr.edu.

UV crosslinking immunoprecipitation (CLIP) is an increasingly popular technique
to study protein-RNA interactions in tissues and cells. Whole cells or tissues
are ultraviolet irradiated to generate a covalent bond between RNA and proteins
that are in close contact. After partial RNase digestion, antibodies specific to 
an RNA binding protein (RBP) or a protein-epitope tag is then used to
immunoprecipitate the protein-RNA complexes. After stringent washing and gel
separation the RBP-RNA complex is excised. The RBP is protease digested to allow 
purification of the bound RNA. Reverse transcription of the RNA followed by
high-throughput sequencing of the cDNA library is now often used to identify
protein bound RNA on a genome-wide scale. UV irradiation can result in cDNA
truncations and/or mutations at the crosslink sites, which complicates the
alignment of the sequencing library to the reference genome and the
identification of the crosslinking sites. Meanwhile, one or more amino acids of a
crosslinked RBP can remain attached to its bound RNA due to incomplete digestion 
of the protein. As a result, reverse transcriptase may not read through the
crosslink sites, and produce cDNA ending at the crosslinked nucleotide. This is
harnessed by one variant of CLIP methods to identify crosslinking sites at a
nucleotide resolution. This method, individual nucleotide resolution CLIP (iCLIP)
circularizes cDNA to capture the truncated cDNA and also increases the efficiency
of ligating sequencing adapters to the library. Here, we describe the detailed
procedure of iCLIP.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-3591-8_12 
PMCID: PMC5673679
PMID: 26965263  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Vis Exp. 2016 Jan 20;(107):e53478. doi: 10.3791/53478.

Isolation of Specific Genomic Regions and Identification of Associated Molecules 
by enChIP.

Fujita T(1), Fujii H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Chromatin Biochemistry Research Group, Combined Program on Microbiology and
Immunology, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University.
(2)Chromatin Biochemistry Research Group, Combined Program on Microbiology and
Immunology, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University;
hodaka@biken.osaka-u.ac.jp.

The identification of molecules associated with specific genomic regions of
interest is required to understand the mechanisms of regulation of the functions 
of these regions. To enable the non-biased identification of molecules
interacting with a specific genomic region of interest, we recently developed the
engineered DNA-binding molecule-mediated chromatin immunoprecipitation (enChIP)
technique. Here, we describe how to use enChIP to isolate specific genomic
regions and identify the associated proteins and RNAs. First, a genomic region of
interest is tagged with a transcription activator-like (TAL) protein or a
clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR) complex
consisting of a catalytically inactive form of Cas9 and a guide RNA.
Subsequently, the chromatin is crosslinked and fragmented by sonication. The
tagged locus is then immunoprecipitated and the crosslinking is reversed.
Finally, the proteins or RNAs that are associated with the isolated chromatin are
subjected to mass spectrometric or RNA sequencing analyses, respectively. This
approach allows the successful identification of proteins and RNAs associated
with a genomic region of interest.

DOI: 10.3791/53478 
PMCID: PMC4781690
PMID: 26862718  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 23;7(8):9477-90. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7053.

Inactivation of BRCA2 in human cancer cells identifies a subset of tumors with
enhanced sensitivity towards death receptor-mediated apoptosis.

De Toni EN(1), Ziesch A(1), Rizzani A(1), Török HP(1), Hocke S(1), Lü S(1), Wang 
SC(2), Hucl T(3), Göke B(1), Bruns C(4), Gallmeier E(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine II, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, 81377 Munich,
Germany.
(2)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio
45267, USA.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University of Prague, 14021
Prague 4, Czech Republic.
(4)Department of Surgery, University of Magdeburg, 39120 Magdeburg, Germany.
(5)Department of Gastroenterology, Philipps University Marburg, 35043 Marburg,
Germany.

PURPOSE: DNA repair defects due to detrimental BRCA2-mutations confer increased
susceptibility towards DNA interstrand-crosslinking (ICL) agents and define
patient subpopulations for individualized genotype-based cancer therapy. However,
due to the side effects of these drugs, there is a need to identify additional
agents, which could be used alone or in combination with ICL-agents. Therefore,
we investigated whether BRCA2-mutations might also increase the sensitivity
towards TRAIL-receptors (TRAIL-R)-targeting compounds.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Two independent model systems were applied: a BRCA2 gene
knockout and a BRCA2 gene complementation model. The effects of TRAIL-R-targeting
compounds and ICL-agents on cell viability, apoptosis and cell cycle distribution
were compared in BRCA2-proficient versus-deficient cancer cells in vitro. In
addition, the effects of the TRAIL-R2-targeting antibody LBY135 were assessed in 
vivo using a murine tumor xenograft model.
RESULTS: BRCA2-deficient cancer cells displayed an increased sensitivity towards 
TRAIL-R-targeting agents. These effects exceeded and were mechanistically
distinguishable from the well-established effects of ICL-agents. In vitro,
ICL-agents expectedly induced an early cell cycle arrest followed by delayed
apoptosis, whereas TRAIL-R-targeting compounds caused early apoptosis without
prior cell cycle arrest. In vivo, treatment with LBY135 significantly reduced the
tumor growth of BRCA2-deficient cancer cells in a xenograft model.
CONCLUSIONS: BRCA2 mutations strongly increase the in vitro- and in
vivo-sensitivity of cancer cells towards TRAIL-R-mediated apoptosis. This effect 
is mechanistically distinguishable from the well-established ICL-hypersensitivity
of BRCA2-deficient cells. Our study thus defines a new genetic subpopulation of
cancers susceptible towards TRAIL-R-targeting compounds, which could facilitate
novel therapeutic approaches for patients with BRCA2-deficient tumors.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.7053 
PMCID: PMC4891053
PMID: 26843614  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016 Feb 29;44(4):1800-12. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkw045. Epub 2016 
Jan 28.

The K⁺-dependent GTPase Nug1 is implicated in the association of the helicase
Dbp10 to the immature peptidyl transferase centre during ribosome maturation.

Manikas RG(1), Thomson E(1), Thoms M(1), Hurt E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Biochemie-Zentrum der Universität Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 328,
Heidelberg D-69120, Germany.
(2)Biochemie-Zentrum der Universität Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 328,
Heidelberg D-69120, Germany ed.hurt@bzh.uni-heidelberg.de.

Ribosome synthesis employs a number of energy-consuming enzymes in both
eukaryotes and prokaryotes. One such enzyme is the conserved circularly permuted 
GTPase Nug1 (nucleostemin in human). Nug1 is essential for 60S subunit assembly
and nuclear export, but its role and time of action during maturation remained
unclear. Based on in vitro enzymatic assays using the Chaetomium thermophilum
(Ct) orthologue, we show that Nug1 exhibits a low intrinsic GTPase activity that 
is stimulated by potassium ions, rendering Nug1 a cation-dependent GTPase. In
vivo we observe 60S biogenesis defects upon depletion of yeast Nug1 or expression
of a Nug1 nucleotide-binding mutant. Most prominently, the RNA helicase Dbp10 was
lost from early pre-60S particles, which suggested a physical interaction that
could be reconstituted in vitro using CtNug1 and CtDbp10. In vivo rRNA-protein
crosslinking revealed that Nug1 and Dbp10 bind at proximal and partially
overlapping sites on the 60S pre-ribosome, most prominently to H89 that will
constitute part of the peptidyl transferase center (PTC). The binding sites of
Dbp10 are the same as those identified for the prokaryotic helicase DbpA bound to
the 50S subunit. We suggest that Dbp10 and DbpA are performing a conserved role
during PTC formation in all organisms.

© The Author(s) 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkw045 
PMCID: PMC4770245
PMID: 26823502  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Nat Chem Biol. 2016 Jan;12(1):22-8. doi: 10.1038/nchembio.1965. Epub 2015 Nov 23.

CRISPR-Cas9-based target validation for p53-reactivating model compounds.

Wanzel M(1)(2), Vischedyk JB(1), Gittler MP(1), Gremke N(1), Seiz JR(1), Hefter
M(1), Noack M(1), Savai R(2)(3)(4), Mernberger M(1), Charles JP(1), Schneikert
J(1), Bretz AC(1), Nist A(1)(5), Stiewe T(1)(2)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Oncology, Philipps University, Marburg, Germany.
(2)Universities of Giessen and Marburg Lung Center (UGMLC), German Center for
Lung Research (DZL), Germany.
(3)Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research, Department of Lung
Development and Remodeling, Bad Nauheim, Germany.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Justus Liebig University, Giessen, Germany.
(5)Genomics Core Facility, Philipps University, Marburg, Germany.

Inactivation of the p53 tumor suppressor by Mdm2 is one of the most frequent
events in cancer, so compounds targeting the p53-Mdm2 interaction are promising
for cancer therapy. Mechanisms conferring resistance to p53-reactivating
compounds are largely unknown. Here we show using CRISPR-Cas9-based target
validation in lung and colorectal cancer that the activity of nutlin, which
blocks the p53-binding pocket of Mdm2, strictly depends on functional p53. In
contrast, sensitivity to the drug RITA, which binds the Mdm2-interacting N
terminus of p53, correlates with induction of DNA damage. Cells with primary or
acquired RITA resistance display cross-resistance to DNA crosslinking compounds
such as cisplatin and show increased DNA cross-link repair. Inhibition of FancD2 
by RNA interference or pharmacological mTOR inhibitors restores RITA sensitivity.
The therapeutic response to p53-reactivating compounds is therefore limited by
compound-specific resistance mechanisms that can be resolved by CRISPR-Cas9-based
target validation and should be considered when allocating patients to
p53-reactivating treatments.

DOI: 10.1038/nchembio.1965 
PMCID: PMC4910870
PMID: 26595461  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


76. DNA Repair (Amst). 2015 Dec;36:49-58. doi: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2015.09.007. Epub
2015 Sep 10.

Repair of UV induced DNA lesions in ribosomal gene chromatin and the role of
"Odd" RNA polymerases (I and III).

Charton R(1), Guintini L(1), Peyresaubes F(1), Conconi A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Département de Microbiologie et Infectiologie, Faculté de Médecine, Université
de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC J1E 4K8, Canada.
(2)Département de Microbiologie et Infectiologie, Faculté de Médecine, Université
de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC J1E 4K8, Canada. Electronic address:
Antonio.Conconi@usherbrooke.ca.

In fast growing eukaryotic cells, a subset of rRNA genes are transcribed at very 
high rates by RNA polymerase I (RNAPI). Nuclease digestion-assays and psoralen
crosslinking have shown that they are open; that is, largely devoid of
nucleosomes. In the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisae, nucleotide excision repair
(NER) and photolyase remove UV photoproducts faster from open rRNA genes than
from closed and nucleosome-loaded inactive rRNA genes. After UV irradiation, rRNA
transcription declines because RNAPI halt at UV photoproducts and are then
displaced from the transcribed strand. When the DNA lesion is quickly recognized 
by NER, it is the sub-pathway transcription-coupled TC-NER that removes the UV
photoproduct. If dislodged RNAPI are replaced by nucleosomes before NER
recognizes the lesion, then it is the sub-pathway global genome GG-NER that
removes the UV photoproducts from the transcribed strand. Also, GG-NER maneuvers 
in the non-transcribed strand of open genes and in both strands of closed rRNA
genes. After repair, transcription resumes and elongating RNAPI reopen the rRNA
gene. In higher eukaryotes, NER in rRNA genes is inefficient and there is no
evidence for TC-NER. Moreover, TC-NER does not occur in RNA polymerase III
transcribed genes of both, yeast and human fibroblast.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2015.09.007 
PMID: 26411875  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


77. RNA. 2015 Nov;21(11):1943-65. doi: 10.1261/rna.053389.115. Epub 2015 Sep 16.

A multiprotein occupancy map of the mRNP on the 3' end of histone mRNAs.

Brooks L 3rd(1), Lyons SM(2), Mahoney JM(1), Welch JD(3), Liu Z(1), Marzluff
WF(2), Whitfield ML(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Dartmouth Geisel School of Medicine, Hanover, New
Hampshire 03755, USA.
(2)Integrative Program for Biological and Genome Sciences, University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.
(3)Department of Computer Science, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill,
North Carolina 27599, USA.

The animal replication-dependent (RD) histone mRNAs are coordinately regulated
with chromosome replication. The RD-histone mRNAs are the only known cellular
mRNAs that are not polyadenylated. Instead, the mature transcripts end in a
conserved stem-loop (SL) structure. This SL structure interacts with the
stem-loop binding protein (SLBP), which is involved in all aspects of RD-histone 
mRNA metabolism. We used several genomic methods, including high-throughput
sequencing of cross-linked immunoprecipitate (HITS-CLIP) to analyze the
RNA-binding landscape of SLBP. SLBP was not bound to any RNAs other than histone 
mRNAs. We performed bioinformatic analyses of the HITS-CLIP data that included
(i) clustering genes by sequencing read coverage using CVCA, (ii) mapping the
bound RNA fragment termini, and (iii) mapping cross-linking induced mutation
sites (CIMS) using CLIP-PyL software. These analyses allowed us to identify
specific sites of molecular contact between SLBP and its RD-histone mRNA ligands.
We performed in vitro crosslinking assays to refine the CIMS mapping and found
that uracils one and three in the loop of the histone mRNA SL preferentially
crosslink to SLBP, whereas uracil two in the loop preferentially crosslinks to a 
separate component, likely the 3'hExo. We also performed a secondary analysis of 
an iCLIP data set to map UPF1 occupancy across the RD-histone mRNAs and found
that UPF1 is bound adjacent to the SLBP-binding site. Multiple proteins likely
bind the 3' end of RD-histone mRNAs together with SLBP.

© 2015 Brooks et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press for the
RNA Society.

DOI: 10.1261/rna.053389.115 
PMCID: PMC4604434
PMID: 26377992  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Mol Cell. 2015 Sep 3;59(5):794-806. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.07.016.

Architecture of the Human and Yeast General Transcription and DNA Repair Factor
TFIIH.

Luo J(1), Cimermancic P(2), Viswanath S(2), Ebmeier CC(3), Kim B(1), Dehecq M(4),
Raman V(3), Greenberg CH(2), Pellarin R(2), Sali A(2), Taatjes DJ(3), Hahn S(5), 
Ranish J(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Systems Biology, 401 Terry Avenue North, Seattle, WA 98109, USA.
(2)Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences, Department of
Pharmaceutical Chemistry, California Institute for Quantitative Biomedical
Sciences, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA.
(3)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 
80303, USA.
(4)Division of Basic Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, 1100
Fairview Avenue North, PO Box 19024, Mailstop A1-162, Seattle, WA 98109, USA;
Génétique des Interactions Macromoléculaires, Institut Pasteur, CNRS UMR3525,
25-28 rue du docteur Roux, 75015 Paris, France.
(5)Division of Basic Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, 1100
Fairview Avenue North, PO Box 19024, Mailstop A1-162, Seattle, WA 98109, USA.
(6)Institute for Systems Biology, 401 Terry Avenue North, Seattle, WA 98109, USA.
Electronic address: jranish@systemsbiology.org.

TFIIH is essential for both RNA polymerase II transcription and DNA repair, and
mutations in TFIIH can result in human disease. Here, we determine the molecular 
architecture of human and yeast TFIIH by an integrative approach using chemical
crosslinking/mass spectrometry (CXMS) data, biochemical analyses, and previously 
published electron microscopy maps. We identified four new conserved "topological
regions" that function as hubs for TFIIH assembly and more than 35 conserved
topological features within TFIIH, illuminating a network of interactions
involved in TFIIH assembly and regulation of its activities. We show that one of 
these conserved regions, the p62/Tfb1 Anchor region, directly interacts with the 
DNA helicase subunit XPD/Rad3 in native TFIIH and is required for the integrity
and function of TFIIH. We also reveal the structural basis for defects in
patients with xeroderma pigmentosum and trichothiodystrophy, with mutations found
at the interface between the p62 Anchor region and the XPD subunit.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.07.016 
PMCID: PMC4560838
PMID: 26340423  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Int J Oncol. 2015 Oct;47(4):1494-502. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2015.3133. Epub 2015 Aug
25.

Myricetin inhibits proliferation of cisplatin-resistant cancer cells through a
p53-dependent apoptotic pathway.

Huang H(1), Chen AY(2), Ye X(3), Li B(4), Rojanasakul Y(2), Rankin GO(5), Chen
YC(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Science, Technology and Mathematics, Alderson Broaddus University, 
Philippi, WV 26416, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Science, West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV
26506, USA.
(3)College of Biosystems Engineering and Food Science, Fuli Institute of Food
Science, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310027, P.R. China.
(4)Department of Orthopaedics, School of Medicine, West Virginia University,
Morgantown, WV 26506, USA.
(5)Department of Pharmacology, Physiology and Toxicology, Joan C. Edwards School 
of Medicine, Marshall University, Huntington, WV 25755, USA.

Cisplatin is a commonly used drug for cancer treatment by crosslinking DNA,
leading to apoptosis of cancer cells, resistance to cisplatin treatment often
occurs, leading to relapse. Therefore, there is a need for the development of
more effective treatment strategies that can overcome chemoresistance. Myricetin 
is a flavonoid from fruits and vegetables, showing anticancer activity in various
cancer cells. In this study, we found myricetin exhibited greater cytotoxicity
than cisplatin in two cisplatin-resistant ovarian cancer cell lines, OVCAR-3 and 
A2780/CP70, and it was less cytotoxic to the normal ovarian cell line IOSE-364.
Myricetin selectively induced apoptosis in both cisplatin-resistant cancer cell
lines, but did not induce apoptosis in the normal ovarian cell line. It induced
both Bcl-2 family-dependent intrinsic and DR5 dependent extrinsic apoptosis in
OVCAR-3 cells. P53, a multifunctional tumor suppressor, regulated apoptosis in
OVCAR-3 cells through a Bcl-2 family protein-dependent pathway. Myricetin did not
induce cell cycle arrest in either ovarian cancer cell line. Because of its
potency and selectivity against cisplatin-resistant cancer cells, myricetin could
potentially be used to overcome cancer chemoresistance against platinum-based
therapy.

DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2015.3133 
PMCID: PMC4583523
PMID: 26315556  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Oncogene. 2016 May 19;35(20):2592-601. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.320. Epub 2015 Aug
24.

ZNF281 contributes to the DNA damage response by controlling the expression of
XRCC2 and XRCC4.

Pieraccioli M(1), Nicolai S(1), Antonov A(2), Somers J(2), Malewicz M(2), Melino 
G(1)(2), Raschellà G(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine and Surgery, University of Rome 'Tor
Vergata', Rome, Italy.
(2)Medical Research Council, Toxicology Unit, Leicester University, Leicester,
UK.
(3)Radiation Biology and Human Health Unit, Italian National Agency for New
Technologies, Energy and Sustainable Economic Development (ENEA) Research Center 
Casaccia, Rome, Italy.

ZNF281 is a zinc-finger factor involved in the control of cellular stemness and
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Here, we report that ZNF281 expression
increased after genotoxic stress caused by DNA-damaging drugs. Comet assays
demonstrated that DNA repair was delayed in cells silenced for the expression of 
ZNF281 and treated with etoposide. Furthermore, the expression of 10 DNA damage
response genes was downregulated in cells treated with etoposide and silenced for
ZNF281. In line with this finding, XRCC2 and XRCC4, two genes that take part in
homologous recombination and non-homologous end joining, respectively, were
transcriptionally activated by ZNF281 through a DNA-binding-dependent mechanism, 
as demonstrated by luciferase assays and Chromatin crosslinking
ImmunoPrecipitation experiments. c-Myc, which also binds to the promoters of
XRCC2 and XRCC4, was unable to promote their transcription or to modify ZNF281
activity. Of interest, bioinformatic analysis of 1971 breast cancer patients
disclosed a significant correlation between the expression of ZNF281 and that of 
XRCC2. In summary, our data highlight, for the first time, the involvement of
ZNF281 in the cellular response to genotoxic stress through the control exercised
on the expression of genes that act in different repair mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2015.320 
PMID: 26300006  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Mol Cell. 2015 Sep 3;59(5):768-80. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.06.037. Epub 2015
Aug 6.

Crosslink Mapping at Amino Acid-Base Resolution Reveals the Path of Scrunched DNA
in Initial Transcribing Complexes.

Winkelman JT(1), Winkelman BT(1), Boyce J(1), Maloney MF(1), Chen AY(1), Ross
W(1), Gourse RL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bacteriology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1550 Linden
Drive, Madison, WI 53706, USA.
(2)Department of Bacteriology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1550 Linden
Drive, Madison, WI 53706, USA. Electronic address: rgourse@bact.wisc.edu.

RNA polymerase binds tightly to DNA to recognize promoters with high specificity 
but then releases these contacts during the initial stage of transcription. We
report a site-specific crosslinking approach to map the DNA path in bacterial
transcription intermediates at amino acid and nucleotide resolution. After
validating the approach by showing that the DNA path in open complexes (RPO) is
the same as in high-resolution X-ray structures, we define the path following
substrate addition in "scrunched" complexes (RPITC). The DNA bulges that form
within the transcription bubble in RPITC are positioned differently on the two
strands. Our data suggest that the non-template strand bulge is extruded into
solvent in complexes containing a 5-mer RNA, whereas the template strand bulge
remains within the template strand tunnel, exerting stress on interactions
between the β flap, β' clamp, and σ3.2. We propose that this stress contributes
to σ3.2 displacement from the RNA exit channel, facilitating promoter escape.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.06.037 
PMCID: PMC4561013
PMID: 26257284  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Methods Enzymol. 2015;560:161-85. doi: 10.1016/bs.mie.2015.03.012. Epub 2015 Jul 
23.

High-Resolution Mapping of N⁶-Methyladenosine in Transcriptome and Genome Using a
Photo-Crosslinking-Assisted Strategy.

Chen K(1), Luo GZ(1), He C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Institute for Biophysical Dynamics, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois,
USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The University of Chicago, Chicago,
Illinois, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Institute for Biophysical Dynamics, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois,
USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The University of Chicago, Chicago,
Illinois, USA. Electronic address: chuanhe@uchicago.edu.

A photo-crosslinking-assisted strategy has been developed and applied to the
high-resolution mapping of N(6)-methylation of adenosine (N(6)-methyladenosine or
m(6)A/6mA, we chose to use m(6)A to represent the RNA methylation, and 6mA to
represent the DNA methylation in order to be consistent with DNA 5mC methylation 
nomenclature) in transcriptome and genome. The new approach introduces a covalent
interaction between the anti-m(6)A antibody and the RNA/DNA molecule, followed by
multiple washing steps which reduce nonspecific binding in immunoprecipitation
and nuclease digestion in order to significantly increase the resolution by
removing unprotected polynucleotides. By using this protocol, a high-resolution
transcriptome-wide human m(6)A map and genome-wide Chlamydomonas 6mA map were
obtained, providing new insights into the distribution and biological functions
of the m(6)A/6mA. This well-established strategy is reproducible and widely
applicable to other biological systems for high-throughput sequencing
investigations of other RNA/DNA modifications.

© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.mie.2015.03.012 
PMID: 26253971  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Sep 18;43(16):7717-30. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv797. Epub 2015
Aug 5.

Crosslinking reactions of 4-amino-6-oxo-2-vinylpyrimidine with guanine
derivatives and structural analysis of the adducts.

Kusano S(1), Ishiyama S(1), Lam SL(2), Mashima T(3), Katahira M(3), Miyamoto
K(4), Aida M(4), Nagatsugi F(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Multidisciplinary Research for Advanced Materials, Tohoku
University, 2-1-1 Katahira, Aoba-ku, Sendai-shi, Miyagi 980-8577, Japan.
(2)Department of Chemistry, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, New
Territories, Hong Kong, China lams@cuhk.edu.hk.
(3)Institute of Advanced Energy, Graduate School of Energy Science, Kyoto
University, Gokasho, Uji, Kyoto 611-0011, Japan.
(4)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Hiroshima
University,1-3-1, Kagamiyama, Higashi-Hiroshima, Hiroshima 739-8526, Japan.
(5)Institute of Multidisciplinary Research for Advanced Materials, Tohoku
University, 2-1-1 Katahira, Aoba-ku, Sendai-shi, Miyagi 980-8577, Japan
nagatugi@tagen.tohoku.ac.jp.

DNA interstrand crosslinks (ICLs) are the primary mechanism for the cytotoxic
activity of many clinical anticancer drugs, and numerous strategies for forming
ICLs have been developed. One such method is using crosslink-forming
oligonucleotides (CFOs). In this study, we designed a
4-amino-6-oxo-2-vinylpyrimidine (AOVP) derivative with an acyclic spacer to react
selectively with guanine. The AOVP CFO exhibited selective crosslinking
reactivity with guanine and thymine in DNA, and with guanine in RNA. These
crosslinking reactions with guanine were accelerated in the presence of CoCl2,
NiCl2, ZnCl2 and MnCl2. In addition, we demonstrated that the AOVP CFO was
reactive toward 8-oxoguanine opposite AOVP in the duplex DNA. The structural
analysis of each guanine and 8-oxoguanine adduct in the duplex DNA was
investigated by high-resolution NMR. The results suggested that AOVP reacts at
the N2 amine in guanine and at the N1 or N2 amines in 8-oxoguanine in the duplex 
DNA. This study demonstrated the first direct determination of the adduct
structure in duplex DNA without enzyme digestion.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkv797 
PMCID: PMC4652779
PMID: 26245348  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Oncotarget. 2015 Jul 10;6(19):17161-77.

3'-Phosphoadenosine 5'-phosphosulfate synthase 1 (PAPSS1) knockdown sensitizes
non-small cell lung cancer cells to DNA damaging agents.

Leung AW(1)(2), Dragowska WH(1), Ricaurte D(1), Kwok B(1), Mathew V(3),
Roosendaal J(1)(4), Ahluwalia A(1), Warburton C(1), Laskin JJ(5)(6), Stirling
PC(3)(7), Qadir MA(1), Bally MB(1)(2)(8)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Therapeutics, BC Cancer Research Centre, Vancouver, BC, V5Z 1L3, 
Canada.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, V6T 2B5, Canada.
(3)Terry Fox Laboratory, BC Cancer Research Centre, Vancouver, BC, V5Z 1L3,
Canada.
(4)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Utrecht, TB, 3508, 
The Netherlands.
(5)Medical Oncology, BC Cancer Research Centre, Vancouver, BC, V5Z 1L3, Canada.
(6)Department of Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, V5Z
1M9, Canada.
(7)Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC,
V6H 3N1, Canada.
(8)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
BC, V6T 1Z3, Canada.
(9)Centre for Drug Research and Development, Vancouver, BC, V6T 1Z3, Canada.

Standard treatment for advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with no known 
driver mutation is platinum-based chemotherapy, which has a response rate of only
30-33%. Through an siRNA screen, 3'-phosphoadenosine 5'-phosphosulfate (PAPS)
synthase 1 (PAPSS1), an enzyme that synthesizes the biologically active form of
sulfate PAPS, was identified as a novel platinum-sensitizing target in NSCLC
cells. PAPSS1 knockdown in combination with low-dose (IC10) cisplatin reduces
clonogenicity of NSCLC cells by 98.7% (p < 0.001), increases DNA damage, and
induces G1/S phase cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. PAPSS1 silencing also
sensitized NSCLC cells to other DNA crosslinking agents, radiation, and
topoisomerase I inhibitors, but not topoisomerase II inhibitors.
Chemo-sensitization was not observed in normal epithelial cells. Knocking out the
PAPSS1 homolog did not sensitize yeast to cisplatin, suggesting that sulfate
bioavailability for amino acid synthesis is not the cause of sensitization to DNA
damaging agents. Rather, sensitization may be due to sulfation reactions involved
in blocking the action of DNA damaging agents, facilitating DNA repair, promoting
cancer cell survival under therapeutic stress or reducing the bioavailability of 
DNA damaging agents. Our study demonstrates for the first time that PAPSS1 could 
be targeted to improve the activity of multiple anticancer agents used to treat
NSCLC.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.3635 
PMCID: PMC4627299
PMID: 26220590  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


85. DNA Repair (Amst). 2015 Sep;33:90-100. doi: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2015.06.008. Epub
2015 Jun 29.

Diadenosine 5', 5'''-P(1),P(4)-tetraphosphate (Ap4A) is synthesized in response
to DNA damage and inhibits the initiation of DNA replication.

Marriott AS(1), Copeland NA(2), Cunningham R(1), Wilkinson MC(1), McLennan AG(3),
Jones NJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool, Liverpool L69 7ZB, 
UK.
(2)Division of Biomedical and Life Sciences, University of Lancaster, Lancaster
LA1 4YG, UK.
(3)Institute of Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool, Liverpool L69 7ZB, 
UK. Electronic address: agmclen@liv.ac.uk.

The level of intracellular diadenosine 5', 5'''-P(1),P(4)-tetraphosphate (Ap4A)
increases several fold in mammalian cells treated with non-cytotoxic doses of
interstrand DNA-crosslinking agents such as mitomycin C. It is also increased in 
cells lacking DNA repair proteins including XRCC1, PARP1, APTX and FANCG, while
>50-fold increases (up to around 25 μM) are achieved in repair mutants exposed to
mitomycin C. Part of this induced Ap4A is converted into novel derivatives,
identified as mono- and di-ADP-ribosylated Ap4A. Gene knockout experiments
suggest that DNA ligase III is primarily responsible for the synthesis of
damage-induced Ap4A and that PARP1 and PARP2 can both catalyze its
ADP-ribosylation. Degradative proteins such as aprataxin may also contribute to
the increase. Using a cell-free replication system, Ap4A was found to cause a
marked inhibition of the initiation of DNA replicons, while elongation was
unaffected. Maximum inhibition of 70-80% was achieved with 20 μM Ap4A. Ap3A,
Ap5A, Gp4G and ADP-ribosylated Ap4A were without effect. It is proposed that Ap4A
acts as an important inducible ligand in the DNA damage response to prevent the
replication of damaged DNA.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2015.06.008 
PMID: 26204256  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Mol Brain. 2015 Jul 14;8:41. doi: 10.1186/s13041-015-0129-7.

Arf6 controls beta-amyloid production by regulating macropinocytosis of the
Amyloid Precursor Protein to lysosomes.

Tang W(1)(2), Tam JH(3)(4), Seah C(5), Chiu J(6)(7), Tyrer A(8)(9), Cregan
SP(10)(11), Meakin SO(12)(13), Pasternak SH(14)(15)(16).

Author information: 
(1)J. Allyn Taylor Centre for Cell Biology, Molecular Medicine Research Group,
Robarts Research Institute, 1151 Richmond St, London, ON, N6A 5B8, Canada.
weihao.tang@athenadiagnostics.com.
(2)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Schulich School of Medicine, the
University of Western Ontario, London, ON, N6A 5B7, Canada.
weihao.tang@athenadiagnostics.com.
(3)J. Allyn Taylor Centre for Cell Biology, Molecular Medicine Research Group,
Robarts Research Institute, 1151 Richmond St, London, ON, N6A 5B8, Canada.
joshuahktam@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Schulich School of Medicine, the
University of Western Ontario, London, ON, N6A 5B7, Canada.
joshuahktam@gmail.com.
(5)J. Allyn Taylor Centre for Cell Biology, Molecular Medicine Research Group,
Robarts Research Institute, 1151 Richmond St, London, ON, N6A 5B8, Canada.
cseah@uwo.ca.
(6)J. Allyn Taylor Centre for Cell Biology, Molecular Medicine Research Group,
Robarts Research Institute, 1151 Richmond St, London, ON, N6A 5B8, Canada.
jchiu54@uwo.ca.
(7)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Schulich School of Medicine, the
University of Western Ontario, London, ON, N6A 5B7, Canada. jchiu54@uwo.ca.
(8)J. Allyn Taylor Centre for Cell Biology, Molecular Medicine Research Group,
Robarts Research Institute, 1151 Richmond St, London, ON, N6A 5B8, Canada.
Andrea.Tyrer@camh.ca.
(9)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Schulich School of Medicine, the
University of Western Ontario, London, ON, N6A 5B7, Canada. Andrea.Tyrer@camh.ca.
(10)J. Allyn Taylor Centre for Cell Biology, Molecular Medicine Research Group,
Robarts Research Institute, 1151 Richmond St, London, ON, N6A 5B8, Canada.
scregan@robarts.ca.
(11)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Schulich School of Medicine, the
University of Western Ontario, London, ON, N6A 5B7, Canada. scregan@robarts.ca.
(12)J. Allyn Taylor Centre for Cell Biology, Molecular Medicine Research Group,
Robarts Research Institute, 1151 Richmond St, London, ON, N6A 5B8, Canada.
smeakin@robarts.ca.
(13)Department of Biochemistry, Schulich School of Medicine, the University of
Western Ontario, London, ON, N6A 5B7, Canada. smeakin@robarts.ca.
(14)J. Allyn Taylor Centre for Cell Biology, Molecular Medicine Research Group,
Robarts Research Institute, 1151 Richmond St, London, ON, N6A 5B8, Canada.
spasternak@robarts.ca.
(15)Department of Clinical Neurological Sciences, Schulich School of Medicine,
the University of Western Ontario, London, ON, N6A 5B7, Canada.
spasternak@robarts.ca.
(16)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Schulich School of Medicine, the
University of Western Ontario, London, ON, N6A 5B7, Canada.
spasternak@robarts.ca.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is characterized by the deposition of Beta-Amyloid (Aβ) 
peptides in the brain. Aβ peptides are generated by cleavage of the Amyloid
Precursor Protein (APP) by the β - and γ - secretase enzymes. Although this
process is tightly linked to the internalization of cell surface APP, the
compartments responsible are not well defined. We have found that APP can be
rapidly internalized from the cell surface to lysosomes, bypassing early and late
endosomes. Here we show by confocal microscopy and electron microscopy that this 
pathway is mediated by macropinocytosis. APP internalization is enhanced by
antibody binding/crosslinking of APP suggesting that APP may function as a
receptor. Furthermore, a dominant negative mutant of Arf6 blocks direct transport
of APP to lysosomes, but does not affect classical endocytosis to endosomes. Arf6
expression increases through the hippocampus with the development of Alzheimer's 
disease, being expressed mostly in the CA1 and CA2 regions in normal individuals 
but spreading through the CA3 and CA4 regions in individuals with pathologically 
diagnosed AD. Disruption of lysosomal transport of APP reduces both Aβ40 and Aβ42
production by more than 30 %. Our findings suggest that the lysosome is an
important site for Aβ production and that altering APP trafficking represents a
viable strategy to reduce Aβ production.

DOI: 10.1186/s13041-015-0129-7 
PMCID: PMC4501290
PMID: 26170135  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


87. RNA. 2015 Sep;21(9):1532-43. doi: 10.1261/rna.051524.115. Epub 2015 Jul 9.

NSUN6 is a human RNA methyltransferase that catalyzes formation of m5C72 in
specific tRNAs.

Haag S(1), Warda AS(1), Kretschmer J(1), Günnigmann MA(1), Höbartner C(2),
Bohnsack MT(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Biochemistry and Molecular Cell Biology, Georg-August-University,
37073 Göttingen, Germany.
(2)Institute for Organic and Biomolecular Chemistry, Georg-August-University,
37077 Göttingen, Germany.
(3)Centre for Biochemistry and Molecular Cell Biology, Georg-August-University,
37073 Göttingen, Germany Göttingen Centre for Molecular Biosciences,
Georg-August-University, 37073 Göttingen, Germany.

Many cellular RNAs require modification of specific residues for their
biogenesis, structure, and function. 5-methylcytosine (m(5)C) is a common
chemical modification in DNA and RNA but in contrast to the DNA modifying
enzymes, only little is known about the methyltransferases that establish m(5)C
modifications in RNA. The putative RNA methyltransferase NSUN6 belongs to the
family of Nol1/Nop2/SUN domain (NSUN) proteins, but so far its cellular function 
has remained unknown. To reveal the target spectrum of human NSUN6, we applied UV
crosslinking and analysis of cDNA (CRAC) as well as chemical crosslinking with
5-azacytidine. We found that human NSUN6 is associated with tRNAs and acts as a
tRNA methyltransferase. Furthermore, we uncovered tRNA(Cys) and tRNA(Thr) as RNA 
substrates of NSUN6 and identified the cytosine C72 at the 3' end of the tRNA
acceptor stem as the target nucleoside. Interestingly, target recognition in
vitro depends on the presence of the 3'-CCA tail. Together with the finding that 
NSUN6 localizes to the cytoplasm and largely colocalizes with marker proteins for
the Golgi apparatus and pericentriolar matrix, our data suggest that NSUN6
modifies tRNAs in a late step in their biogenesis.

© 2015 Haag et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press for the RNA 
Society.

DOI: 10.1261/rna.051524.115 
PMCID: PMC4536315
PMID: 26160102  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


88. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 29;10(6):e0128225. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0128225.
eCollection 2015.

Structural and Biochemical Characterization of the Francisella tularensis
Pathogenicity Regulator, Macrophage Locus Protein A (MglA).

Cuthbert BJ(1), Brennan RG(1), Schumacher MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, North 
Carolina, 27710, United States of America.

Francisella tularensis is one of the most infectious bacteria known and is the
etiologic agent of tularemia. Francisella virulence arises from a 33 kilobase
(Kb) pathogenicity island (FPI) that is regulated by the macrophage locus protein
A (MglA) and the stringent starvation protein A (SspA). These proteins interact
with both RNA polymerase (RNAP) and the pathogenicity island gene regulator
(PigR) to activate FPI transcription. However, the molecular mechanisms involved 
are not well understood. Indeed, while most bacterial SspA proteins function as
homodimers to activate transcription, F. tularensis SspA forms a heterodimer with
the MglA protein, which is unique to F. tularensis. To gain insight into MglA
function, we performed structural and biochemical studies. The MglA structure
revealed that it contains a fold similar to the SspA protein family.
Unexpectedly, MglA also formed a homodimer in the crystal. Chemical crosslinking 
and size exclusion chromatography (SEC) studies showed that MglA is able to
self-associate in solution to form a dimer but that it preferentially
heterodimerizes with SspA. Finally, the MglA structure revealed malate, which was
used in crystallization, bound in an open pocket formed by the dimer, suggesting 
the possibility that this cleft could function in small molecule ligand binding. 
The location of this binding region relative to recently mapped PigR and RNAP
interacting sites suggest possible roles for small molecule binding in MglA and
SspA•MglA function.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0128225 
PMCID: PMC4488300
PMID: 26121147  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Sep 15;24(18):5093-108. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv227. Epub 2015
Jun 17.

AluY-mediated germline deletion, duplication and somatic stem cell reversion in
UBE2T defines a new subtype of Fanconi anemia.

Virts EL(1), Jankowska A(1), Mackay C(2), Glaas MF(3), Wiek C(3), Kelich SL(1),
Lottmann N(3), Kennedy FM(1), Marchal C(1), Lehnert E(4), Scharf RE(4), Dufour
C(5), Lanciotti M(5), Farruggia P(6), Santoro A(7), Savasan S(8), Scheckenbach
K(3), Schipper J(3), Wagenmann M(3), Lewis T(9), Leffak M(9), Farlow JL(10),
Foroud TM(10), Honisch E(11), Niederacher D(11), Chakraborty SC(10), Vance
GH(10), Pruss D(12), Timms KM(12), Lanchbury JS(12), Alpi AF(13), Hanenberg
H(14).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and.
(2)Department of MRC Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, College of 
Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, UK.
(3)Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Head/Neck Surgery (ENT) and.
(4)Department of Experimental and Clinical Hemostasis, Hemotherapy and
Transfusion Medicine, Heinrich Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(5)Hematology Unit, G. Gaslini Children's Hospital, Genoa, Italy.
(6)Pediatric Hematology and Oncology Unit, A.R.N.A.S. Ospedale Civico, Palermo,
Italy.
(7)A.O. Ospedali Riuniti Villa Sofia-Cervello, Palermo, Italy.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Michigan, Wayne State
University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI, USA.
(9)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Boonshoft School of
Medicine, Wright State University, Dayton, OH 45435, USA.
(10)Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.
(11)Department of Gynecology, Heinrich Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany and.
(12)Myriad Genetics Inc., Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(13)Department of MRC Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, College of
Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, UK, hhanenbe@iu.edu
a.f.alpi@dundee.ac.uk.
(14)Department of Pediatrics and Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA, Department of
Otorhinolaryngology and Head/Neck Surgery (ENT) and hhanenbe@iu.edu
a.f.alpi@dundee.ac.uk.

Fanconi anemia (FA) is a rare inherited disorder clinically characterized by
congenital malformations, progressive bone marrow failure and cancer
susceptibility. At the cellular level, FA is associated with hypersensitivity to 
DNA-crosslinking genotoxins. Eight of 17 known FA genes assemble the FA E3 ligase
complex, which catalyzes monoubiquitination of FANCD2 and is essential for
replicative DNA crosslink repair. Here, we identify the first FA patient with
biallelic germline mutations in the ubiquitin E2 conjugase UBE2T. Both mutations 
were aluY-mediated: a paternal deletion and maternal duplication of exons 2-6.
These loss-of-function mutations in UBE2T induced a cellular phenotype similar to
biallelic defects in early FA genes with the absence of FANCD2
monoubiquitination. The maternal duplication produced a mutant mRNA that could
encode a functional protein but was degraded by nonsense-mediated mRNA decay. In 
the patient's hematopoietic stem cells, the maternal allele with the duplication 
of exons 2-6 spontaneously reverted to a wild-type allele by monoallelic
recombination at the duplicated aluY repeat, thereby preventing bone marrow
failure. Analysis of germline DNA of 814 normal individuals and 850 breast cancer
patients for deletion or duplication of UBE2T exons 2-6 identified the deletion
in only two controls, suggesting aluY-mediated recombinations within the UBE2T
locus are rare and not associated with an increased breast cancer risk. Finally, 
a loss-of-function germline mutation in UBE2T was detected in a high-risk breast 
cancer patient with wild-type BRCA1/2. Cumulatively, we identified UBE2T as a
bona fide FA gene (FANCT) that also may be a rare cancer susceptibility gene.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddv227 
PMCID: PMC4550815
PMID: 26085575  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Elife. 2015 Jun 16;4:e09225. doi: 10.7554/eLife.09225.

A simple method for generating high-resolution maps of genome-wide protein
binding.

Skene PJ(1), Henikoff S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, United States.

Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and its derivatives are the main techniques 
used to determine transcription factor binding sites. However, conventional ChIP 
with sequencing (ChIP-seq) has problems with poor resolution, and newer
techniques require significant experimental alterations and complex
bioinformatics. Previously, we have used a new crosslinking ChIP-seq protocol
(X-ChIP-seq) to perform high-resolution mapping of RNA Polymerase II (Skene et
al., 2014). Here, we build upon this work and compare X-ChIP-seq to existing
methodologies. By using micrococcal nuclease, which has both endo- and
exo-nuclease activity, to fragment the chromatin and thereby generate precise
protein-DNA footprints, high-resolution X-ChIP-seq achieves single base-pair
resolution of transcription factor binding. A significant advantage of this
protocol is the minimal alteration to the conventional ChIP-seq workflow and
simple bioinformatic processing.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.09225 
PMCID: PMC4480131
PMID: 26079792  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Mass Spectrom Rev. 2016 Jan-Feb;35(1):48-70. doi: 10.1002/mas.21462. Epub 2015
May 6.

Applying mass spectrometry to study non-covalent biomolecule complexes.

Chen F(1), Gülbakan B(2), Weidmann S(1), Fagerer SR(1), Ibáñez AJ(1), Zenobi
R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Applied Biosciences, ETH Zürich, CH-8093, Zürich, 
Switzerland.
(2)Institute of Child Health, Division of Pediatric Basic Sciences, Hacettepe
University, 06100 Ankara, Turkey.

Non-covalent interactions are essential for the structural organization of
biomacromolecules and play an important role in molecular recognition processes, 
such as the interactions between proteins, glycans, lipids, DNA, and RNA. Mass
spectrometry (MS) is a powerful tool for studying of non-covalent interactions,
due to the low sample consumption, high sensitivity, and label-free nature.
Nowadays, native-ESI MS is heavily used in studies of non-covalent interactions
and to understand the architecture of biomolecular complexes. However, MALDI-MS
is also becoming increasingly useful. It is challenging to detect the intact
complex without fragmentation when analyzing non-covalent interactions with
MALDI-MS. There are two methodological approaches to do so. In the first
approach, different experimental and instrumental parameters are fine-tuned in
order to find conditions under which the complex is stable, such as applying
non-acidic matrices and collecting first-shot spectra. In the second approach,
the interacting species are "artificially" stabilized by chemical crosslinking.
Both approaches are capable of studying non-covalently bound biomolecules even in
quite challenging systems, such as membrane protein complexes. Herein, we review 
and compare native-ESI and MALDI MS for the study of non-covalent interactions.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/mas.21462 
PMID: 25945814  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Acta Neuropathol. 2015 Jul;130(1):63-75. doi: 10.1007/s00401-015-1429-9. Epub
2015 May 6.

Antisense RNA foci in the motor neurons of C9ORF72-ALS patients are associated
with TDP-43 proteinopathy.

Cooper-Knock J(1), Higginbottom A, Stopford MJ, Highley JR, Ince PG, Wharton SB, 
Pickering-Brown S, Kirby J, Hautbergue GM, Shaw PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Sheffield Institute for Translational Neuroscience (SITraN), University of
Sheffield, 385A Glossop Road, Sheffield, S10 2HQ, UK.

GGGGCC repeat expansions of C9ORF72 represent the most common genetic variant of 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal dementia. We and others
have proposed that RNA transcribed from the repeat sequence is toxic via
sequestration of RNA-binding factors. Both GGGGCC-repeat (sense) and
CCCCGG-repeat (antisense) molecules are detectable by fluorescence in situ
hybridisation as RNA foci, but their relative expression pattern within the CNS
and contribution to disease has not been determined. Blinded examination of CNS
biosamples from ALS patients with a repeat expansion of C9ORF72 showed that
antisense foci are present at a significantly higher frequency in cerebellar
Purkinje neurons and motor neurons, whereas sense foci are present at a
significantly higher frequency in cerebellar granule neurons. Consistent with
this, inclusions containing sense or antisense derived dipeptide repeat proteins 
were present at significantly higher frequency in cerebellar granule neurons or
motor neurons, respectively. Immunohistochemistry and UV-crosslinking studies
showed that sense and antisense RNA molecules share similar interactions with
SRSF2, hnRNP K, hnRNP A1, ALYREF, and hnRNP H/F. Together these data suggest
that, although sense and antisense RNA molecules might be expected to be equally 
toxic via their shared protein binding partners, distinct patterns of expression 
in various CNS neuronal populations could lead to relative differences in their
contribution to the pathogenesis of neuronal injury. Moreover in motor neurons,
which are the primary target of pathology in ALS, the presence of antisense foci 
(χ (2), p < 0.00001) but not sense foci (χ (2), p = 0.75) correlated with
mislocalisation of TDP-43, which is the hallmark of ALS neurodegeneration. This
has implications for translational approaches to C9ORF72 disease, and furthermore
interacting RNA-processing factors and transcriptional activators responsible for
antisense versus sense transcription might represent novel therapeutic targets.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-015-1429-9 
PMCID: PMC4468790
PMID: 25943887  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


93. RNA Biol. 2015;12(3):255-67. doi: 10.1080/15476286.2015.1017221.

The RNA recognition motif of NIFK is required for rRNA maturation during cell
cycle progression.

Pan WA(1), Tsai HY, Wang SC, Hsiao M, Wu PY, Tsai MD.

Author information: 
(1)a Institute of Biological Chemistry; Academia Sinica ; Taipei , Taiwan.

Ribosome biogenesis governs protein synthesis. NIFK is transactivated by c-Myc,
the key regulator of ribosome biogenesis. The biological function of human NIFK
is not well established, except that it has been shown to interact with Ki67 and 
NPM1. Here we report that NIFK is required for cell cycle progression and
participates in the ribosome biogenesis via its RNA recognition motif (RRM). We
show that silencing of NIFK inhibits cell proliferation through a reversible
p53-dependent G1 arrest, possibly by induction of the RPL5/RPL11-mediated
nucleolar stress. Mechanistically it is the consequence of impaired maturation of
28S and 5.8S rRNA resulting from inefficient cleavage of internal transcribed
spacer (ITS) 1, a critical step in the separation of pre-ribosome to small and
large subunits. Complementation of NIFK silencing by mutants shows that
RNA-binding ability of RRM is essential for the pre-rRNA processing and G1
progression. More specifically, we validate that the RRM of NIFK preferentially
binds to the 5'-region of ITS2 rRNA likely in both sequence specific and
secondary structure dependent manners. Our results show how NIFK is involved in
cell cycle progression through RRM-dependent pre-rRNA maturation, which could
enhance our understanding of the function of NIFK in cell proliferation, and
potentially also cancer and ribosomopathies.

DOI: 10.1080/15476286.2015.1017221 
PMCID: PMC4615200
PMID: 25826659  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Methods Mol Biol. 2015;1296:41-51. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-2547-6_5.

Improved Northern blot detection of small RNAs using EDC crosslinking and DNA/LNA
probes.

Damm K(1), Bach S, Müller KM, Klug G, Burenina OY, Kubareva EA, Grünweller A,
Hartmann RK.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Pharmazeutische Chemie, Philipps-Universität Marburg, Marbacher
Weg 6, 35037, Marburg, Germany.

Successful detection of very small RNAs (tiny RNA, ~14 nt in length) by Northern 
blotting is dependent on improved Northern blot protocols that combine chemical
crosslinking of RNA with 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)-carbodiimide (EDC) to 
positively charged membranes, the use of native polyacrylamide gels, and the
development of highly sensitive and specific probes modified with locked nucleic 
acids (LNA). In this protocol, we show that Northern blot detection of tiny RNAs 
with 5'-digoxigenin-labeled DNA/LNA mixmer probes is a highly sensitive and
specific method and, in our hands, more sensitive than using a corresponding
DNA/LNA mixmer probe with a 5'-(32)P-end label.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-2547-6_5 
PMID: 25791589  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Molecules. 2015 Mar 13;20(3):4708-19. doi: 10.3390/molecules20034708.

Synthesis of peptide nucleic acids containing a crosslinking agent and evaluation
of their reactivities.

Akisawa T(1), Ishizawa Y(2), Nagatsugi F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Multidisciplinary Research for Advanced Materials, Tohoku
University, 2-1-1 Katahira, Aoba-ku, Sendai-shi, Miyagi 980-8577, Japan.
akisawat@mail.tagen.tohoku.ac.jp.
(2)Institute of Multidisciplinary Research for Advanced Materials, Tohoku
University, 2-1-1 Katahira, Aoba-ku, Sendai-shi, Miyagi 980-8577, Japan.
yi87653@yahoo.co.jp.
(3)Institute of Multidisciplinary Research for Advanced Materials, Tohoku
University, 2-1-1 Katahira, Aoba-ku, Sendai-shi, Miyagi 980-8577, Japan.
nagatugi@tagen.tohoku.ac.jp.

Peptide nucleic acids (PNAs) are structural mimics of nucleic acids that form
stable hybrids with DNA and RNA. In addition, PNAs can invade double-stranded
DNA. Due to these characteristics, PNAs are widely used as biochemical tools, for
example, in antisense/antigene therapy. Interstrand crosslink formation in
nucleic acids is one of the strategies for preparing a stable duplex by covalent 
bond formation. In this study, we have synthesized PNAs incorporating
4-amino-6-oxo-2-vinylpyrimidine (AOVP) as a crosslinking agent and evaluated
their reactivities for targeting DNA and RNA.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules20034708 
PMCID: PMC6272193
PMID: 25781072  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


96. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 16;10(3):e0119007. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0119007.
eCollection 2015.

TFIIB is only ∼9 Å away from the 5'-end of a trimeric RNA primer in a functional 
RNA polymerase II preinitiation complex.

Bick MJ(1), Malik S(2), Mustaev A(3), Darst SA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY, 
United States of America.
(2)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Rockefeller University, 
New York, NY, United States of America.
(3)Department of Chemistry and Environmental Sciences, New Jersey Institute of
Technology, University Heights, Newark, NJ, United States of America.

Recent X-ray crystallographic studies of Pol II in complex with the general
transcription factor (GTF) IIB have begun to provide insights into the mechanism 
of transcription initiation. These structures have also shed light on the
architecture of the transcription preinitiation complex (PIC). However,
structural characterization of a functional PIC is still lacking, and even the
topological arrangement of the GTFs in the Pol II complex is a matter of
contention. We have extended our activity-based affinity crosslinking studies,
initially developed to investigate the interaction of bacterial RNA polymerase
with σ, to the eukaryotic transcription machinery. Towards that end, we sought to
identify GTFs that are within the Pol II active site in a functioning PIC. We
provide biochemical evidence that TFIIB is located within ∼9 Å of the -2 site of 
promoter DNA, where it is positioned to play a role in de novo transcription
initiation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0119007 
PMCID: PMC4361453
PMID: 25774659  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


97. PLoS One. 2015 Feb 19;10(2):e0116726. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0116726.
eCollection 2015.

Whole cell formaldehyde cross-linking simplifies purification of mitochondrial
nucleoids and associated proteins involved in mitochondrial gene expression.

Rajala N(1), Hensen F(2), Wessels HJ(3), Ives D(4), Gloerich J(3), Spelbrink
JN(5).

Author information: 
(1)Mitochondrial DNA Maintenance Group, BioMediTech, FI-33014 University of
Tampere, Tampere, Finland.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Nijmegen Centre for Mitochondrial Disorders, Radboud
University Medical Centre, Geert Grooteplein 10, P.O. Box 9101, 6500 HB,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Nijmegen Centre for Mitochondrial Disorders, Radboud
University Medical Centre, Geert Grooteplein 10, P.O. Box 9101, 6500 HB,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands; Radboud Proteomics Centre, Department of Laboratory
Medicine, Laboratory of Genetic Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders, Radboud
University Medical Centre, Geert Grooteplein 10, P.O. Box 9101, 6500 HB,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(4)MRC-National Institute for Medical Research, Mill Hill, London, United
Kingdom.
(5)Mitochondrial DNA Maintenance Group, BioMediTech, FI-33014 University of
Tampere, Tampere, Finland; Department of Pediatrics, Nijmegen Centre for
Mitochondrial Disorders, Radboud University Medical Centre, Geert Grooteplein 10,
P.O. Box 9101, 6500 HB, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Mitochondrial DNA/protein complexes (nucleoids) appear as discrete entities
inside the mitochondrial network when observed by live-cell imaging and
immunofluorescence. This somewhat trivial observation in recent years has spurred
research towards isolation of these complexes and the identification of
nucleoid-associated proteins. Here we show that whole cell formaldehyde
crosslinking combined with affinity purification and tandem mass-spectrometry
provides a simple and reproducible method to identify potential nucleoid
associated proteins. The method avoids spurious mitochondrial isolation and
subsequent multifarious nucleoid enrichment protocols and can be implemented to
allow for label-free quantification (LFQ) by mass-spectrometry. Using expression 
of a Flag-tagged Twinkle helicase and appropriate controls we show that this
method identifies many previously identified nucleoid associated proteins. Using 
LFQ to compare HEK293 cells with and without mtDNA, but both expressing
Twinkle-FLAG, identifies many proteins that are reduced or absent in the absence 
of mtDNA. This set not only includes established mtDNA maintenance proteins but
also many proteins involved in mitochondrial RNA metabolism and translation and
therefore represents what can be considered an mtDNA gene expression proteome.
Our data provides a very valuable resource for both basic mitochondrial
researchers as well as clinical geneticists working to identify novel disease
genes on the basis of exome sequence data.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0116726 
PMCID: PMC4335056
PMID: 25695250  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Cancer Lett. 2015 May 28;361(1):33-8. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2015.02.020. Epub
2015 Feb 14.

ROMO1 regulates RedOx states and serves as an inducer of NF-κB-driven EMT factors
in Fanconi anemia.

Shyamsunder P(1), Verma RS(1), Lyakhovich A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Stem cell and Molecular biology Laboratory, Department of Biotechnology,
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai, India.
(2)Novosibirsk Institute of Molecular Biology and Biophysics, Russia; Medical
Biology Centre, School of Biological Sciences, Queen's University Belfast, 97
Lisburn Road, Belfast BT9 7BL, UK. Electronic address: lyakhovich@gmail.com.

Fanconi anemia (FA) is a rare genetic disorder associated with a bone-marrow
failure, genome instability, hypersensitivity to DNA crosslinking agents and a
predisposition to cancer. Mutations have been documented in 16 FA genes that
participate in the FA-BRCA DNA repair pathway, a fundamental pathway in the
development of the disease and the presentation of its symptoms. Besides the
well-established role of FA genes in DNA damage and repair pathways, recent
reports have revealed an overproduction of epithelial to mesenchymal transition
(EMT) factors via a NF-κB-dependent mechanism that results in the proliferation
of neighboring tumor cells and FA cells have also been shown to possess damaged
mitochondria, accompanied by altered RedOx pathways. This study has focused on
reactive oxygen species Modulator-1 (ROMO1), an oncomarker and mitochondrial
membrane protein, which is known to be associated with cancer growth and in the
modulation of RedOx states in some cancer models. Here, we reveal the role of
ROMO1 and demonstrate its link in regulating RedOx states and in the activation
of NF-κB-dependent EMT factors in FA.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.canlet.2015.02.020 
PMID: 25687884  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Mol Cell. 2015 Feb 5;57(3):408-21. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.12.014. Epub 2015
Jan 15.

The ratcheted and ratchetable structural states of RNA polymerase underlie
multiple transcriptional functions.

Sekine S(1), Murayama Y(2), Svetlov V(3), Nudler E(4), Yokoyama S(5).

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Systems and Structural Biology Center, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku,
Yokohama 230-0045, Japan; Department of Biophysics and Biochemistry, Graduate
School of Science, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo
113-0033, Japan; Division of Structural and Synthetic Biology, RIKEN Center for
Life Science Technologies, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045,
Japan. Electronic address: shunichi.sekine@riken.jp.
(2)RIKEN Systems and Structural Biology Center, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku,
Yokohama 230-0045, Japan; Department of Biophysics and Biochemistry, Graduate
School of Science, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo
113-0033, Japan; Division of Structural and Synthetic Biology, RIKEN Center for
Life Science Technologies, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045,
Japan.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, New York University
School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, New York University
School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, New
York University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA.
(5)RIKEN Systems and Structural Biology Center, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku,
Yokohama 230-0045, Japan; Department of Biophysics and Biochemistry, Graduate
School of Science, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo
113-0033, Japan; RIKEN Structural Biology Laboratory, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho,
Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan. Electronic address: yokoyama@riken.jp.

DNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RNAP) accomplishes multiple tasks during
transcription by assuming different structural forms. Reportedly, the "tight"
form performs nucleotide addition to nascent RNA, while the "ratcheted" form is
adopted for transcription inhibition. In this study, we performed Cys-pair
crosslinking (CPX) analyses of various transcription complexes of a bacterial
RNAP and crystallographic analyses of its backtracked and Gre-factor-bound states
to clarify which of the two forms is adopted. The ratcheted form was revealed to 
support GreA-dependent transcript cleavage, long backtracking, hairpin-dependent 
pausing, and termination. In contrast, the tight form correlated with nucleotide 
addition, mismatch-dependent pausing, one-nucleotide backtracking, and
factor-independent transcript cleavage. RNAP in the paused/backtracked state, but
not the nucleotide-addition state, readily transitions to the ratcheted form
("ratchetable"), indicating that the tight form represents two distinct
regulatory states. The 3' end and the hairpin structure of the nascent RNA
promote the ratchetable nature by modulating the trigger-loop conformation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.12.014 
PMID: 25601758  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


100. RETRACTED ARTICLE

Science. 2014 Dec 19;346(6216):1486-92. doi: 10.1126/science.346.6216.1486.

MAVS, cGAS, and endogenous retroviruses in T-independent B cell responses.

Zeng M(1), Hu Z(2), Shi X(2), Li X(1), Zhan X(1), Li XD(3), Wang J(3), Choi
JH(1), Wang KW(1), Purrington T(1), Tang M(1), Fina M(1), DeBerardinis RJ(2),
Moresco EM(1), Pedersen G(4), McInerney GM(4), Karlsson Hedestam GB(4), Chen
ZJ(3), Beutler B(5).

Author information: 
(1)Center for the Genetics of Host Defense, University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center, 5323 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, TX 75390-8502, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics and Children's Medical Center Research Institute, and
McDermott Center for Human Growth and Development, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, 5323 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, TX 75390-8502,
USA.
(3)Center for the Genetics of Host Defense, University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center, 5323 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, TX 75390-8502, USA. Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, 5323 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, TX 75390-9148,
USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institutet,
Nobels väg 16, SE-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Center for the Genetics of Host Defense, University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center, 5323 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, TX 75390-8502, USA.
Bruce.Beutler@UTSouthwestern.edu.

Retraction in
    Science. 2017 Oct 27;358(6362):458.

Comment in
    Science. 2014 Dec 19;346(6216):1454-5.

Multivalent molecules with repetitive structures including bacterial capsular
polysaccharides and viral capsids elicit antibody responses through B cell
receptor (BCR) crosslinking in the absence of T cell help. We report that
immunization with these T cell-independent type 2 (TI-2) antigens causes
up-regulation of endogenous retrovirus (ERV) RNAs in antigen-specific mouse B
cells. These RNAs are detected via a mitochondrial antiviral signaling protein
(MAVS)-dependent RNA sensing pathway or reverse-transcribed and detected via the 
cGAS-cGAMP-STING pathway, triggering a second, sustained wave of signaling that
promotes specific immunoglobulin M production. Deficiency of both MAVS and cGAS, 
or treatment of MAVS-deficient mice with reverse transcriptase inhibitors,
dramatically inhibits TI-2 antibody responses. These findings suggest that ERV
and two innate sensing pathways that detect them are integral components of the
TI-2 B cell signaling apparatus.

Copyright © 2014, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

DOI: 10.1126/science.346.6216.1486 
PMCID: PMC4391621
PMID: 25525240  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 2014 Nov;198(1):1-10. doi:
10.1016/j.molbiopara.2014.10.005. Epub 2014 Nov 3.

Molecular characterization of Plasmodium falciparum Bruno/CELF RNA binding
proteins.

Wongsombat C(1), Aroonsri A(2), Kamchonwongpaisan S(3), Morgan HP(4), Walkinshaw 
MD(5), Yuthavong Y(6), Shaw PJ(7).

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (BIOTEC), National
Science and Technology Development Agency (NSTDA), 113 Thailand Science Park,
Thanon Phahonyothin, Tambon Khlong Neung, Amphoe Khlong Luang, Pathum Thani
12120, Thailand. Electronic address: chayaphat.won@biotec.or.th.
(2)National Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (BIOTEC), National
Science and Technology Development Agency (NSTDA), 113 Thailand Science Park,
Thanon Phahonyothin, Tambon Khlong Neung, Amphoe Khlong Luang, Pathum Thani
12120, Thailand. Electronic address: aiyada.aro@biotec.or.th.
(3)National Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (BIOTEC), National
Science and Technology Development Agency (NSTDA), 113 Thailand Science Park,
Thanon Phahonyothin, Tambon Khlong Neung, Amphoe Khlong Luang, Pathum Thani
12120, Thailand. Electronic address: sumaleek@biotec.or.th.
(4)Centre for Translational and Chemical Biology, University of Edinburgh,
Michael Swann Building, King's Buildings, Mayfield Road, Edinburgh EH9 3JR, UK.
Electronic address: morgan_hugh@yahoo.co.uk.
(5)Centre for Translational and Chemical Biology, University of Edinburgh,
Michael Swann Building, King's Buildings, Mayfield Road, Edinburgh EH9 3JR, UK.
Electronic address: m.walkinshaw@ed.ac.uk.
(6)National Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (BIOTEC), National
Science and Technology Development Agency (NSTDA), 113 Thailand Science Park,
Thanon Phahonyothin, Tambon Khlong Neung, Amphoe Khlong Luang, Pathum Thani
12120, Thailand. Electronic address: yongyuth@biotec.or.th.
(7)National Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (BIOTEC), National
Science and Technology Development Agency (NSTDA), 113 Thailand Science Park,
Thanon Phahonyothin, Tambon Khlong Neung, Amphoe Khlong Luang, Pathum Thani
12120, Thailand. Electronic address: philip@biotec.or.th.

The human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum employs intricate
post-transcriptional regulatory mechanisms in different stages of its life cycle.
Despite the importance of post-transcriptional regulation, key elements of these 
processes, namely RNA binding proteins (RBPs), are poorly characterized. In this 
study, the RNA binding properties of P. falciparum proteins were characterized
including two putative members of the Bruno/CELF family of RBPs (PfCELF1 and
PfCELF2), dihydrofolate reductase-thymidylate synthase (PfDHFR-TS), and adenosine
deaminase (PfAda). RNA binding activity was tested using UV-crosslinking and
electrophoretic mobility shift assays. PfCELF1 and PfDHFR-TS demonstrated RNA
binding activity, whereas PfAda and PfCELF2 were RBP-negative. Intracellular
protein localization of RBPs was studied using GFP-tagged transgenic parasite
lines. PfCELF1 protein may shuttle between nucleus and cytoplasm, as shown by a
predominantly nuclear PfCELF1 cell population and another predominantly
cytoplasmic. In contrast, PfDHFR-TS protein is predominantly cytoplasmic. PfCELF1
may thus have several roles, including pre-mRNA processing. The mRNA targets of
these P. falciparum proteins were investigated by ribonomics using DNA
microarrays. A sequence motif similar to that recognized by CELF proteins in
other species is common in the introns of target mRNAs identified for PfCELF1,
suggesting that nuclear-localized PfCELF1 may regulate pre-mRNA splicing in P.
falciparum, as has been found for CELF proteins in other species. In contrast,
none or very few mRNA targets were found for the other proteins, suggesting that 
they do not have biologically relevant roles as RBPs in the asexual stages of P. 
falciparum.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molbiopara.2014.10.005 
PMID: 25447287  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Nat Commun. 2014 Nov 4;5:5248. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6248.

PAR-CLIP analysis uncovers AUF1 impact on target RNA fate and genome integrity.

Yoon JH(1), De S(1), Srikantan S(1), Abdelmohsen K(1), Grammatikakis I(1), Kim
J(1), Kim KM(1), Noh JH(1), White EJ(2), Martindale JL(1), Yang X(1), Kang MJ(1),
Wood WH 3rd(1), Noren Hooten N(3), Evans MK(3), Becker KG(1), Tripathi V(4),
Prasanth KV(4), Wilson GM(2), Tuschl T(5), Ingolia NT(6), Hafner M(7), Gorospe
M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, National Institute on Aging-Intramural Research
Program, NIH, Baltimore, Maryland 21224, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Maryland
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21201, USA.
(3)Laboratory of Epidemiology and Population Sciences, National Institute on
Aging-Intramural Research Program, NIH, Baltimore, Maryland 21224, USA.
(4)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA.
(5)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Laboratory of RNA Molecular Biology,
Rockefeller University, New York, New York 10065, USA.
(6)Department of Embryology, Carnegie Institution for Science, Baltimore,
Maryland 21218, USA.
(7)1] Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Laboratory of RNA Molecular Biology,
Rockefeller University, New York, New York 10065, USA [2] Laboratory of Muscle
Stem Cells and Gene Regulation, National Institute of Arthritis and
Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Post-transcriptional gene regulation is robustly regulated by RNA-binding
proteins (RBPs). Here we describe the collection of RNAs regulated by AUF1
(AU-binding factor 1), an RBP linked to cancer, inflammation and aging.
Photoactivatable ribonucleoside-enhanced crosslinking and immunoprecipitation
(PAR-CLIP) analysis reveals that AUF1 primarily recognizes U-/GU-rich sequences
in mRNAs and noncoding RNAs and influences target transcript fate in three main
directions. First, AUF1 lowers the steady-state levels of numerous target RNAs,
including long noncoding RNA NEAT1, in turn affecting the organization of nuclear
paraspeckles. Second, AUF1 does not change the abundance of many target RNAs, but
ribosome profiling reveals that AUF1 promotes the translation of numerous mRNAs
in this group. Third, AUF1 unexpectedly enhances the steady-state levels of
several target mRNAs encoding DNA-maintenance proteins. Through its actions on
target RNAs, AUF1 preserves genomic integrity, in agreement with the
AUF1-elicited prevention of premature cellular senescence.

DOI: 10.1038/ncomms6248 
PMCID: PMC4291169
PMID: 25366541  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Feb;11(2):1344-51. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.2785. Epub 2014 Oct
27.

V‑set and transmembrane domain‑containing 1 is silenced in human hematopoietic
malignancy cell lines with promoter methylation and has inhibitory effects on
cell growth.

Li T(1), Guo X(1), Wang W(1), Mo X(1), Wang P(1), Han W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Peking University Center for Human Disease Genomics, Beijing 100191, P.R.
China.

Numerous leukocyte differentiation antigens act as important markers for
research, diagnosis, triage and eventually treatment targets for hematopoietic
malignancies. V‑set and transmembrane domain‑containing 1 (VSTM1) was identified 
by immunogenomic analysis as a potential leukocyte differentiation antigen gene. 
VSTM1 is located at 19q13.4 on human chromosomes, an important genomic region
prone to genetic and epigenetic modifications in numerous hematopoietic
malignancies. VSTM1‑v1, a primary splicing form encoded by VSTM1, is a type I
transmembrane molecule with an extracellular immunoglobulin V‑like domain and two
cytoplasmic immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibitory motifs. In the present
study, VSTM1 expression was examined in normal human peripheral leukocytes and
hematopoietic tumor cell lines; in addition, the aberrant methylation of the
VSTM1 gene was evaluated using methylation‑specific polymerase chain reaction
(MSP). The results of the present study demonstrated that VSTM1 was widely
expressed in normal human peripheral blood leukocytes, including granulocytes and
monocytes, in concurrence with previous studies, as well as lymphocytes; in
addition, the molecular size and expression levels of VSTM1 varied considerably
between leukocytes. However, VSTM1 was undetectable in numerous hematopoietic
tumor cell lines following promoter hypermethylation. The effects of
pharmacologically‑induced demethylation of the VSTM1 gene and promoter region
were analyzed using MSP and biosulfite genomic sequencing, and the results
revealed that VSTM1 expression was restored in methylation‑silenced Jurkat cells.
In addition, CKK‑8 assays revealed that VSTM1‑v1 overexpression in Jurkat cells
resulted in growth suppression. Furthermore, the inhibitory effect on cell growth
was enhanced following antibody‑induced cross‑linking of VSTM1‑v1. In conclusion,
the results of the present study indicated that promoter methylation silenced
VSTM1 and negatively regulated cell growth in human hematopoietic malignancy cell
lines.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2014.2785 
PMID: 25351446  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


104. BMC Genomics. 2014 Oct 23;15:925. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-925.

SeAMotE: a method for high-throughput motif discovery in nucleic acid sequences.

Agostini F, Cirillo D, Ponti RD, Tartaglia GG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Gene Function and Evolution, Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), C/ Dr,
Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona, Spain. gian.tartaglia@crg.es.

BACKGROUND: The large amount of data produced by high-throughput sequencing poses
new computational challenges. In the last decade, several tools have been
developed for the identification of transcription and splicing factor binding
sites.
RESULTS: Here, we introduce the SeAMotE (Sequence Analysis of Motifs Enrichment) 
algorithm for discovery of regulatory regions in nucleic acid sequences. SeAMotE 
provides (i) a robust analysis of high-throughput sequence sets, (ii) a motif
search based on pattern occurrences and (iii) an easy-to-use web-server
interface. We applied our method to recently published data including 351
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and 13 crosslinking immunoprecipitation
(CLIP) experiments and compared our results with those of other well-established 
motif discovery tools. SeAMotE shows an average accuracy of 80% in finding
discriminative motifs and outperforms other methods available in literature.
CONCLUSIONS: SeAMotE is a fast, accurate and flexible algorithm for the
identification of sequence patterns involved in protein-DNA and protein-RNA
recognition. The server can be freely accessed at
http://s.tartaglialab.com/new_submission/seamote.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-925 
PMCID: PMC4223730
PMID: 25341390  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Bio Protoc. 2014 Jul 20;7(14). pii: e2398. doi: 10.21769/BioProtoc.2398.

Mapping RNA Sequences that Contact Viral Capsid Proteins in Virions.

Kao CC(1), Chuang E(1), Ford J(2), Huang J(2), Podicheti R(2), Rusch DB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular & Cellular Biochemistry, Indiana University,
Bloomington, IN 47405, USA.
(2)The Center for Genomics and Bioinformatics, Indiana University, Bloomington,
IN 47405, USA.

We have adapted the methodology of CLIP-seq (Crosslinking-Immunoprecipitation and
DNA Sequencing) to map the segments of encapsidated RNAs that contact the protein
shells of virions. Results from the protocol report on the RNA sequences that
contact the viral capsid.

DOI: 10.21769/BioProtoc.2398 
PMCID: PMC5659631
PMID: 29082288 


106. Brain. 2014 Jul;137(Pt 7):2040-51. doi: 10.1093/brain/awu120. Epub 2014 May 27.

Sequestration of multiple RNA recognition motif-containing proteins by C9orf72
repeat expansions.

Cooper-Knock J(1), Walsh MJ(1), Higginbottom A(1), Robin Highley J(1), Dickman
MJ(2), Edbauer D(3), Ince PG(1), Wharton SB(1), Wilson SA(4), Kirby J(1),
Hautbergue GM(1), Shaw PJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)1 Sheffield Institute for Translational Neuroscience (SITraN), University of
Sheffield, 385A Glossop Road, Sheffield S10 2HQ, UK.
(2)2 Chemical and Biological Engineering, ChELSI Institute, University of
Sheffield, Mappin Street, Sheffield, S1 3JD, UK.
(3)3 DZNE-German Centre for Neurodegenerative Diseases and Munich Cluster of
Systems Neurology (SyNergy), Munich, Germany.
(4)4 Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, University of Sheffield, 
Firth Court, Sheffield, S10 2TN, UK.
(5)1 Sheffield Institute for Translational Neuroscience (SITraN), University of
Sheffield, 385A Glossop Road, Sheffield S10 2HQ, UK pamela.shaw@sheffield.ac.uk.

GGGGCC repeat expansions of C9orf72 represent the most common genetic variant of 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal degeneration, but the mechanism 
of pathogenesis is unclear. Recent reports have suggested that the transcribed
repeat might form toxic RNA foci that sequester various RNA processing proteins. 
Consensus as to the identity of the binding partners is missing and whole
neuronal proteome investigation is needed. Using RNA fluorescence in situ
hybridization we first identified nuclear and cytoplasmic RNA foci in peripheral 
and central nervous system biosamples from patients with amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis with a repeat expansion of C9orf72 (C9orf72+), but not from those
patients without a repeat expansion of C9orf72 (C9orf72-) or control subjects.
Moreover, in the cases examined, the distribution of foci-positive neurons
correlated with the clinical phenotype (t-test P < 0.05). As expected, RNA foci
are ablated by RNase treatment. Interestingly, we identified foci in fibroblasts 
from an asymptomatic C9orf72+ carrier. We next performed pulldown assays, with
GGGGCC5, in conjunction with mass spectrometry analysis, to identify candidate
binding partners of the GGGGCC repeat expansion. Proteins containing RNA
recognition motifs and involved in splicing, messenger RNA nuclear export and/or 
translation were significantly enriched. Immunohistochemistry in central nervous 
system tissue from C9orf72+ patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
demonstrated co-localization of RNA foci with SRSF2, hnRNP H1/F, ALYREF and hnRNP
A1 in cerebellar granule cells and with SRSF2, hnRNP H1/F and ALYREF in motor
neurons, the primary target of pathology in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Direct
binding of proteins to GGGGCC repeat RNA was confirmed in vitro by
ultraviolet-crosslinking assays. Co-localization was only detected in a small
proportion of RNA foci, suggesting dynamic sequestration rather than irreversible
binding. Additional immunohistochemistry demonstrated that neurons with and
without RNA foci were equally likely to show nuclear depletion of TDP-43 (χ(2) P 
= 0.75) or poly-GA dipeptide repeat protein inclusions (χ(2) P = 0.46). Our
findings suggest two non-exclusive pathogenic mechanisms: (i) functional
depletion of RNA-processing proteins resulting in disruption of messenger RNA
splicing; and (ii) licensing of expanded C9orf72 pre-messenger RNA for nuclear
export by inappropriate association with messenger RNA export adaptor protein(s) 
leading to cytoplasmic repeat associated non-ATG translation and formation of
potentially toxic dipeptide repeat protein.

© The Author (2014). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Guarantors of Brain.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awu120 
PMCID: PMC4065024
PMID: 24866055  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Mol Cell. 2014 Jun 5;54(5):887-900. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.04.016. Epub 2014 
May 15.

RNA Bind-n-Seq: quantitative assessment of the sequence and structural binding
specificity of RNA binding proteins.

Lambert N(1), Robertson A(2), Jangi M(1), McGeary S(3), Sharp PA(4), Burge CB(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA
02142, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA
02142, USA; Program in Computational and Systems Biology, Massachusetts Institute
of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
(3)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA
02142, USA; Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
(4)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA
02142, USA; Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
(5)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA
02142, USA; Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. Electronic address:
cburge@mit.edu.

Specific protein-RNA interactions guide posttranscriptional gene regulation.
Here, we describe RNA Bind-n-Seq (RBNS), a method that comprehensively
characterizes sequence and structural specificity of RNA binding proteins (RBPs),
and its application to the developmental alternative splicing factors RBFOX2,
CELF1/CUGBP1, and MBNL1. For each factor, we recovered both canonical motifs and 
additional near-optimal binding motifs. RNA secondary structure inhibits binding 
of RBFOX2 and CELF1, while MBNL1 favors unpaired Us but tolerates C/G pairing in 
motifs containing UGC and/or GCU. Dissociation constants calculated from RBNS
data using a novel algorithm correlated highly with values measured by surface
plasmon resonance. Motifs identified by RBNS were conserved, were bound and
active in vivo, and distinguished the subset of motifs enriched by CLIP-Seq that 
had regulatory activity. Together, our data demonstrate that RBNS complements
crosslinking-based methods and show that in vivo binding and activity of these
splicing factors is driven largely by intrinsic RNA affinity.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.04.016 
PMCID: PMC4142047
PMID: 24837674  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


108. RNA. 2014 May;20(5):644-55. doi: 10.1261/rna.040444.113. Epub 2014 Mar 10.

RNAs nonspecifically inhibit RNA polymerase II by preventing binding to the DNA
template.

Pai DA, Kaplan CD, Kweon HK, Murakami K, Andrews PC, Engelke DR.

Many RNAs are known to act as regulators of transcription in eukaryotes,
including certain small RNAs that directly inhibit RNA polymerases both in
prokaryotes and eukaryotes. We have examined the potential for a variety of RNAs 
to directly inhibit transcription by yeast RNA polymerase II (Pol II) and find
that unstructured RNAs are potent inhibitors of purified yeast Pol II. Inhibition
by RNA is achieved by blocking binding of the DNA template and requires binding
of the RNA to Pol II prior to open complex formation. RNA is not able to displace
a DNA template that is already stably bound to Pol II, nor can RNA inhibit
elongating Pol II. Unstructured RNAs are more potent inhibitors than highly
structured RNAs and can also block specific transcription initiation in the
presence of basal transcription factors. Crosslinking studies with ultraviolet
light show that unstructured RNA is most closely associated with the two large
subunits of Pol II that comprise the template binding cleft, but the RNA has
contacts in a basic residue channel behind the back wall of the active site.
These results are distinct from previous observations of specific inhibition by
small, structured RNAs in that they demonstrate a sensitivity of the holoenzyme
to inhibition by unstructured RNA products that bind to a surface outside the DNA
cleft. These results are discussed in terms of the need to prevent inhibition by 
RNAs, either though sequestration of nascent RNA or preemptive interaction of Pol
II with the DNA template.

DOI: 10.1261/rna.040444.113 
PMCID: PMC3988566
PMID: 24614752  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Methods Enzymol. 2014;539:183-93. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-420120-0.00010-4.

Dissecting a known RNA-protein interaction using a yeast three-hybrid system.

Koh YY(1), Wickens M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology Doctoral Training Program, University of Wisconsin - Madison,
Madison, WI, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, University of Wisconsin - Madison, Madison, WI,
USA. Electronic address: wickens@biochem.wisc.edu.

The yeast three-hybrid system has been applied to known protein-RNA interactions 
for a variety of purposes. For instance, protein and RNA mutants with altered or 
relaxed binding specificities can be identified. Mutant RNAs can also be analyzed
to better understand RNA-binding specificity of a specific protein. Furthermore, 
this system complements other biochemical techniques, for example, SELEX,
co-immunoprecipitation and cross-linking experiments (see UV crosslinking of
interacting RNA and protein in cultured cells and PAR-CLIP (Photoactivatable
Ribonucleoside-Enhanced Crosslinking and Immunoprecipitation): a step-by-step
protocol to the transcriptome-wide identification of binding sites of RNA-binding
proteins).

© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-420120-0.00010-4 
PMID: 24581444  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Feb 18;111(7):2494-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1318962111. Epub 2014 Feb 3.

The tripartite motif coiled-coil is an elongated antiparallel hairpin dimer.

Sanchez JG(1), Okreglicka K, Chandrasekaran V, Welker JM, Sundquist WI, Pornillos
O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biological Physics and The Myles H.
Thaler Center for AIDS and Human Retrovirus Research, University of Virginia,
Charlottesville, VA 22908.

Tripartite motif (TRIM) proteins make up a large family of coiled-coil-containing
RING E3 ligases that function in many cellular processes, particularly innate
antiviral response pathways. Both dimerization and higher-order assembly are
important elements of TRIM protein function, but the atomic details of TRIM
tertiary and quaternary structure have not been fully understood. Here, we
present crystallographic and biochemical analyses of the TRIM coiled-coil and
show that TRIM proteins dimerize by forming interdigitating antiparallel helical 
hairpins that position the N-terminal catalytic RING domains at opposite ends of 
the dimer and the C-terminal substrate-binding domains at the center. The dimer
core comprises an antiparallel coiled-coil with a distinctive, symmetric pattern 
of flanking heptad and central hendecad repeats that appear to be conserved
across the entire TRIM family. Our studies reveal how the coiled-coil organizes
TRIM25 to polyubiquitylate the RIG-I/viral RNA recognition complex and how dimers
of the TRIM5α protein are arranged within hexagonal arrays that recognize the
HIV-1 capsid lattice and restrict retroviral replication.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1318962111 
PMCID: PMC3932864
PMID: 24550273  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Feb 13;5:e1055. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.27.

TXNL1-XRCC1 pathway regulates cisplatin-induced cell death and contributes to
resistance in human gastric cancer.

Xu W(1), Wang S(1), Chen Q(1), Zhang Y(2), Ni P(2), Wu X(3), Zhang J(3), Qiang
F(3), Li A(1), Røe OD(4), Xu S(2), Wang M(5), Zhang R(6), Zhou J(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Molecular Cell Biology and Toxicology, Key Laboratory of
Modern Toxicology (NJMU), Ministry of Education, Nanjing, People's Republic of
China [2] Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Cancer Biomarkers, Prevention and Treatment, 
Cancer Center, Nanjing, People's Republic of China [3] School of Public Health,
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Cell Biology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Nanjing Medical 
University, Nanjing, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Oncology, Nantong Cancer Hospital, Jiangsu Province, People's
Republic of China.
(4)1] Department of Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Norwegian University 
of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway [2] Cancer Clinic, LevangerHospital,
Nord-Trøndelag Health Trust, Levanger, Norway.
(5)Department of Biomedical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, Texas Tech University
Health Sciences Center, Amarillo, TX, USA.
(6)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, Texas Tech
University Health Sciences Center, Amarillo, TX, USA.

Cisplatin is a cytotoxic platinum compound that triggers DNA crosslinking induced
cell death, and is one of the reference drugs used in the treatment of several
types of human cancers including gastric cancer. However, intrinsic or acquired
drug resistance to cisplatin is very common, and leading to treatment failure. We
have recently shown that reduced expression of base excision repair protein XRCC1
(X-ray repair cross complementing group1) in gastric cancerous tissues correlates
with a significant survival benefit from adjuvant first-line platinum-based
chemotherapy. In this study, we demonstrated the role of XRCC1 in repair of
cisplatin-induced DNA lesions and acquired cisplatin resistance in gastric cancer
by using cisplatin-sensitive gastric cancer cell lines BGC823 and the
cisplatin-resistant gastric cancer cell lines
BGC823/cis-diamminedichloridoplatinum(II) (DDP). Our results indicated that the
protein expression of XRCC1 was significantly increased in cisplatin-resistant
cells and independently contributed to cisplatin resistance. Irinotecan, another 
chemotherapeutic agent to induce DNA damaging used to treat patients with
advanced gastric cancer that progressed on cisplatin, was found to inhibit the
expression of XRCC1 effectively, and leading to an increase in the sensitivity of
resistant cells to cisplatin. Our proteomic studies further identified a cofactor
of 26S proteasome, the thioredoxin-like protein 1 (TXNL1) that downregulated
XRCC1 in BGC823/DDP cells via the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. In conclusion,
the TXNL1-XRCC1 is a novel regulatory pathway that has an independent role in
cisplatin resistance, indicating a putative drug target for reversing cisplatin
resistance in gastric cancer.

DOI: 10.1038/cddis.2014.27 
PMCID: PMC3944244
PMID: 24525731  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Inorg Biochem. 2014 Feb;131:87-98. doi: 10.1016/j.jinorgbio.2013.11.001. Epub
2013 Nov 9.

Cobalt(III)hexaammine-dependent photocrosslinks in the hairpin ribozyme.

Kraemer-Chant CM(1), Heckman JE(2), Lambert D(2), Burke JM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, 95 Carrigan Drive,
University of Vermont, Burlington, VT 05405, USA. Electronic address:
cchant@smcvt.edu.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, 95 Carrigan Drive,
University of Vermont, Burlington, VT 05405, USA.

We have utilized the hairpin ribozyme, an RNA enzyme whose structure has been
solved by high-resolution methods, to develop a new tool for mapping
nucleobase-stacking interactions and potential metal-binding sites in RNA
molecules. This tool involves the photoactivation of a specifically bound
cobalt(III)hexaammine molecule at wavelengths corresponding to excitation of the 
metal ion complex only; no base excitation is involved. The photoexcitation
initiates a process which strongly promotes the formation of a novel covalent
bond or crosslink between one base (termed the "first base"), which is close in
space to the excited cobalt(III)hexaammine complex, and another base upon which
the first base is closely stacked. These crosslinked species can be isolated and 
sequenced; their activities can be analyzed to ensure that the crosslinked
structures represent an active conformation of the molecule. We have shown that, 
as in electron transfer in DNA, several criteria must be met to result in the
successful formation of these crosslinks. These include the appropriate oxidation
potential of the first donor base, the stacking and close interaction of the two 
donor bases involved in the crosslink, and the binding of a specific
cobalt(III)hexaammine molecule to the first donor base. Additionally, we have
determined that this crosslinking is pH-sensitive, although the cause of this
sensitivity remains unknown. This tool has proven useful in the past for the
analysis of the hairpin ribozyme folded structure, and has been applied to
identify potential metal-binding sites on the hairpin and extended hammerhead
ribozymes.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jinorgbio.2013.11.001 
PMCID: PMC3897194
PMID: 24295878  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Haemophilia. 2014 Mar;20(2):255-62. doi: 10.1111/hae.12298. Epub 2013 Nov 29.

Severe congenital factor XIII deficiency caused by novel W187X and G273V
mutations in the F13A gene; diagnosis and classification according to the
ISTH/SSC guidelines.

Souri M(1), Biswas A, Misawa M, Omura H, Ichinose A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Patho-Biochemistry and Patho-Biology, Yamagata
University School of Medicine, Yamagata, Japan.

Factor XIII (FXIII) consists of the A and B subunits (FXIII-A and FXIII-B) and
stabilizes fibrin clots. Defects in either the FXIII-A or FXIII-B gene lead to
congenital FXIII deficiency, which manifests a life-long haemorrhagic tendency.
Thus, prophylactic FXIII replacement therapy is recommended. To establish a
management plan for a 30-year-old male patient with 'indefinite' FXIII deficiency
(<40% of the normal FXIII), he was characterized by state-of-the-art techniques
as guided by the FXIII/Fibrinogen subcommittee of ISTH/SSC. FXIII activity turned
out to be virtually undetectable by three functional assays. Four immunological
assays detected essentially no FXIII protein, FXIII-A antigen, and A2 B2 antigen,
but normal FXIII-B antigen. Accordingly, he was diagnosed as a 'severe' FXIII-A
deficiency case. He had no anti-FXIII antibodies, because a 1:1 cross-mixing test
(ammonia release assay) and a five-step mixing test (amine incorporation assay)
between his plasma and normal plasma demonstrated deficiency patterns.
Furthermore, a dosing test using plasma-derived FXIII concentrates revealed its
normal recovery. DNA sequencing analysis identified two novel mutations, W187X & 
G273V, in the F13A gene. Genetic analyses confirmed that he was a compound
heterozygote and his mother and sister were heterozygotes of either one of these 
mutations, indicating the hereditary nature of this disorder. Molecular modelling
predicted that the G273V mutation would cause clashes with the surrounding
residues in the core domain of FXIII-A, and ultimately would result in the
instability of the mutant molecule. Detailed characterization of 'indefinite'
FXIII deficiency made it possible to make its definite diagnosis and best
management plan.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/hae.12298 
PMID: 24286209  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


114. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 20;8(11):e80461. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080461.
eCollection 2013.

Helicase-like transcription factor (Hltf) regulates G2/M transition,
Wt1/Gata4/Hif-1a cardiac transcription networks, and collagen biogenesis.

Helmer RA(1), Martínez-Zaguilán R, Dertien JS, Fulford C, Foreman O, Peiris V,
Chilton BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology & Biochemistry, Texas Tech University Health
Sciences Center, Lubbock, Texas, United States of America.

HLTF/Hltf regulates transcription, remodels chromatin, and coordinates DNA damage
repair. Hltf is expressed in mouse brain and heart during embryonic and postnatal
development. Silencing Hltf is semilethal. Seventy-four percent of congenic
C57BL/6J Hltf knockout mice died, 75% within 12-24 hours of birth. Previous
studies in neonatal (6-8 hour postpartum) brain revealed silencing Hltf disrupted
cell cycle progression, and attenuated DNA damage repair. An RNA-Seq snapshot of 
neonatal heart transcriptome showed 1,536 of 20,000 total transcripts were
altered (p < 0.05) - 10 up- and 1,526 downregulated. Pathway enrichment analysis 
with MetaCore™ showed Hltf's regulation of the G2/M transition (p=9.726E(-15)) of
the cell cycle in heart is nearly identical to its role in brain. In addition,
Brca1 and 12 members of the Brca1 associated genome surveillance complex are also
downregulated. Activation of caspase 3 coincides with transcriptional repression 
of Bcl-2. Hltf loss caused downregulation of Wt1/Gata4/Hif-1a signaling cascades 
as well as Myh7b/miR499 transcription. Hltf-specific binding to promoters and/or 
regulatory regions of these genes was authenticated by ChIP-PCR. Hif-1a targets
for prolyl (P4ha1, P4ha2) and lysyl (Plod2) collagen hydroxylation, PPIase
enzymes (Ppid, Ppif, Ppil3) for collagen trimerization, and lysyl oxidase (Loxl2)
for collagen-elastin crosslinking were downregulated. However, transcription of
genes for collagens, fibronectin, Mmps and their inhibitors (Timps) was
unaffected. The collective downregulation of genes whose protein products control
collagen biogenesis caused disorganization of the interstitial and perivascular
myocardial collagen fibrillar network as viewed with picrosirius red-staining,
and authenticated with spectral imaging. Wavy collagen bundles in control hearts 
contrasted with collagen fibers that were thin, short and disorganized in Hltf
null hearts. Collagen bundles in Hltf null hearts were tangled and fragmented.
Thus, silencing Hltf during heart organogenesis compromised DNA double-strand
break repair, and caused aberrant collagen biogenesis altering the structural
network that transmits cardiomyocyte force into muscle contraction.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080461 
PMCID: PMC3835564
PMID: 24278285  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Methods. 2014 Feb;65(3):263-73. doi: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2013.10.015. Epub 2013 Nov
6.

Hyb: a bioinformatics pipeline for the analysis of CLASH (crosslinking, ligation 
and sequencing of hybrids) data.

Travis AJ(1), Moody J(2), Helwak A(3), Tollervey D(3), Kudla G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh,
Scotland, United Kingdom; Institute of Biological and Environmental Sciences,
University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, Scotland, United Kingdom.
(2)MRC Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine,
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Scotland, United Kingdom.
(3)Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh,
Scotland, United Kingdom.
(4)MRC Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine,
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Scotland, United Kingdom. Electronic address:
gkudla@gmail.com.

Associations between proteins and RNA-RNA duplexes are important in
post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression. The CLASH (Cross-linking,
Ligation and Sequencing of Hybrids) technique captures RNA-RNA interactions by
physically joining two RNA molecules associated with a protein complex into a
single chimeric RNA molecule. These events are relatively rare and considerable
effort is needed to detect a small number of chimeric sequences amongst millions 
of non-chimeric cDNA reads resulting from a CLASH experiment. We present the
"hyb" bioinformatics pipeline, which we developed to analyse high-throughput cDNA
sequencing data from CLASH experiments. Although primarily designed for use with 
AGO CLASH data, hyb can also be used for the detection and annotation of chimeric
reads in other high-throughput sequencing datasets. We examined the sensitivity
and specificity of chimera detection in a test dataset using the BLAST, BLAST+,
BLAT, pBLAT and Bowtie2 read alignment programs. We obtained the most reliable
results in the shortest time using a combination of preprocessing with Flexbar
and subsequent read-mapping using Bowtie2. The "hyb" software is distributed
under the GNU GPL (General Public License) and can be downloaded from
https://github.com/gkudla/hyb.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2013.10.015 
PMCID: PMC3969109
PMID: 24211736  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Methods. 2014 Feb;65(3):274-87. doi: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2013.10.011. Epub 2013 Oct
25.

iCLIP: protein-RNA interactions at nucleotide resolution.

Huppertz I(1), Attig J(1), D'Ambrogio A(1), Easton LE(2), Sibley CR(1), Sugimoto 
Y(2), Tajnik M(3), König J(4), Ule J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neuroscience, UCL Institute of Neurology, Queen
Square, London WC1N 3BG, UK; MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Francis Crick
Avenue, Cambridge CB2 0QH, UK.
(2)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Francis Crick Avenue, Cambridge CB2 0QH, 
UK.
(3)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Francis Crick Avenue, Cambridge CB2 0QH, 
UK; Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Vrazov trg 2, 1000 Ljubljana,
Slovenia.
(4)Department of Molecular Neuroscience, UCL Institute of Neurology, Queen
Square, London WC1N 3BG, UK; MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Francis Crick
Avenue, Cambridge CB2 0QH, UK; Institute of Molecular Biology, Ackermannweg 4,
55128 Mainz, Germany. Electronic address: j.koenig@imb-mainz.de.
(5)Department of Molecular Neuroscience, UCL Institute of Neurology, Queen
Square, London WC1N 3BG, UK; MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Francis Crick
Avenue, Cambridge CB2 0QH, UK. Electronic address: j.ule@ucl.ac.uk.

RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) are key players in the post-transcriptional
regulation of gene expression. Precise knowledge about their binding sites is
therefore critical to unravel their molecular function and to understand their
role in development and disease. Individual-nucleotide resolution UV crosslinking
and immunoprecipitation (iCLIP) identifies protein-RNA crosslink sites on a
genome-wide scale. The high resolution and specificity of this method are
achieved by an intramolecular cDNA circularization step that enables analysis of 
cDNAs that truncated at the protein-RNA crosslink sites. Here, we describe the
improved iCLIP protocol and discuss critical optimization and control experiments
that are required when applying the method to new RBPs.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2013.10.011 
PMCID: PMC3988997
PMID: 24184352  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Methods Mol Biol. 2014;1093:73-95. doi: 10.1007/978-1-62703-694-8_7.

HITS-CLIP (CLIP-Seq) for mouse Piwi proteins.

Vourekas A(1), Mourelatos Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Division of Neuropathology,
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Piwi proteins, such as Aubergine in Drosophila and Miwi and Mili in mice, form a 
major subclade of the Argonaute family, which comprise a distinct class of
RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) able to bind small RNAs. Small RNAs can target
complementary RNAs. Piwis are essential for the animal germline and bind
Piwi-interacting RNAs (piRNAs) to form pi-RiboNucleoProteins (piRNPs). Although
many piRNAs target retrotransposons for safeguarding genome integrity of the germ
cell, whether piRNAs can target other mRNAs for regulatory purposes is still
under investigation. Here we present the technical protocol for "High Throughput 
Sequencing after in vivo Crosslinking and Immunoprecipitation" (HITS-CLIP,
CLIP-Seq), adapted for mouse Piwi proteins Mili and Miwi. We also provide general
recommendations for the application of this protocol for different RBPs and also 
for the bioinformatic analysis of the deep sequencing data.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-62703-694-8_7 
PMID: 24178558  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Methods Mol Biol. 2014;1086:193-207. doi: 10.1007/978-1-62703-667-2_11.

Applying UV crosslinking to study RNA-protein interactions in multicomponent
ribonucleoprotein complexes.

Krasilnikov AS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Center for RNA Molecular
Biology, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, USA.

Ribonucleoprotein complexes (RNPs) play crucial roles in a wide range of
biological processes. Here, we describe experimental approaches to the UV
crosslinking-based identification of protein-binding sites on RNA, using
multicomponent Saccharomyces cerevisiae RNPs of the RNase P/MRP family as an
example. To identify the binding sites of a protein component of interest, a
hexahistidine affinity tag was fused to that protein. Then RNase P/MRP RNPs were 
purified from yeast cells that had expressed the protein component of interest
with the fused tag, subjected to UV crosslinking, and disassembled to separate
the non-covalently-bound components. The protein component of interest was
isolated under denaturing conditions using the hexahistidine tag as a
purification handle. Provided that the isolated protein formed UV-induced
crosslinks with the RNA component of the studied RNP, the isolation of the
protein resulted in the co-isolation of the covalently bound RNP RNA. The
isolated protein was enzymatically degraded, and the UV crosslinked RNA was
purified. The locations of the crosslinks formed between the protein component of
interest and the RNP RNA were identified by primer extension with a reverse
transcriptase followed by gel electrophoresis; this procedure was repeated for
all of the protein components of RNases P/MRP.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-62703-667-2_11 
PMID: 24136605  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


119. RNA. 2013 Dec;19(12):1639-47. doi: 10.1261/rna.041194.113. Epub 2013 Oct 15.

Identification of the binding site of Rlp7 on assembling 60S ribosomal subunits
in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Dembowski JA, Ramesh M, McManus CJ, Woolford JL Jr.

Eukaryotic ribosome assembly requires over 200 assembly factors that facilitate
rRNA folding, ribosomal protein binding, and pre-rRNA processing. One such factor
is Rlp7, an essential RNA binding protein required for consecutive pre-rRNA
processing steps for assembly of yeast 60S ribosomal subunits: exonucleolytic
processing of 27SA3 pre-rRNA to generate the 5' end of 5.8S rRNA and
endonucleolytic cleavage of the 27SB pre-rRNA to initiate removal of internal
transcribed spacer 2 (ITS2). To better understand the functions of Rlp7 in 27S
pre-rRNA processing steps, we identified where it crosslinks to pre-rRNA. We
found that Rlp7 binds at the junction of ITS2 and the ITS2-proximal stem, between
the 3' end of 5.8S rRNA and the 5' end of 25S rRNA. Consistent with Rlp7 binding 
to this neighborhood during assembly, two-hybrid and affinity copurification
assays showed that Rlp7 interacts with other assembly factors that bind to or
near ITS2 and the proximal stem. We used in vivo RNA structure probing to
demonstrate that the proximal stem forms prior to Rlp7 binding and that Rlp7
binding induces RNA conformational changes in ITS2 that may chaperone rRNA
folding and regulate 27S pre-rRNA processing. Our findings contradict the
hypothesis that Rlp7 functions as a placeholder for ribosomal protein L7, from
which Rlp7 is thought to have evolved in yeast. The binding site of Rlp7 is
within eukaryotic-specific RNA elements, which are not found in bacteria. Thus,
we propose that Rlp7 coevolved with these RNA elements to facilitate
eukaryotic-specific functions in ribosome assembly and pre-rRNA processing.

DOI: 10.1261/rna.041194.113 
PMCID: PMC3884665
PMID: 24129494  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


120. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 31;8(7):e70714. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0070714. Print 2013.

Quality control of RNA preservation and extraction from paraffin-embedded tissue:
implications for RT-PCR and microarray analysis.

Kashofer K(1), Viertler C, Pichler M, Zatloukal K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria.

Analysis of RNA isolated from fixed and paraffin-embedded tissues is widely used 
in biomedical research and molecular pathological diagnostics. We have performed 
a comprehensive and systematic investigation of the impact of factors in the
pre-analytical workflow, such as different fixatives, fixation time, RNA
extraction method and storage of tissues in paraffin blocks, on several
downstream reactions including complementary DNA (cDNA) synthesis, quantitative
reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) and microarray
hybridization. We compared the effects of routine formalin fixation with the
non-crosslinking, alcohol-based Tissue Tek Xpress Molecular Fixative (TTXMF,
Sakura Finetek), and cryopreservation as gold standard for molecular analyses.
Formalin fixation introduced major changes into microarray gene expression data
and led to marked gene-to-gene variations in delta-ct values of qRT-PCR. We found
that qRT-PCR efficiency and gene-to-gene variations were mainly attributed to
differences in the efficiency of cDNA synthesis as the most sensitive step. These
differences could not be reliably detected by quality assessment of total RNA
isolated from formalin-fixed tissues by electrophoresis or spectrophotometry.
Although RNA from TTXMF fixed samples was as fragmented as RNA from formalin
fixed samples, much higher cDNA yield and lower ct-values were obtained in
qRT-PCR underlining the negative impact of crosslinking by formalin. In order to 
better estimate the impact of pre-analytical procedures such as fixation on the
reliability of downstream analysis, we applied a qRT-PCR-based assay using
amplicons of different length and an assay measuring the efficiency of cDNA
generation. Together these two assays allowed better quality assessment of RNA
extracted from fixed and paraffin-embedded tissues and should be used to
supplement quality scores derived from automated electrophoresis. A better
standardization of the pre-analytical workflow, application of additional quality
controls and detailed sample information would markedly improve the comparability
and reliability of molecular studies based on formalin-fixed and
paraffin-embedded tissue samples.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0070714 
PMCID: PMC3729557
PMID: 23936242  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Oct;41(18):8615-27. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt634. Epub 2013
Jul 22.

Target recognition, RNA methylation activity and transcriptional regulation of
the Dictyostelium discoideum Dnmt2-homologue (DnmA).

Müller S(1), Windhof IM, Maximov V, Jurkowski T, Jeltsch A, Förstner KU, Sharma
CM, Gräf R, Nellen W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Kassel, Heinrich-Plett-Str. 40, 34132
Kassel, Germany, Institute of Biochemistry, University Stuttgart, Pfaffenwaldring
55, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany, Research Center for Infectious Diseases (ZINF),
University of Würzburg, Josef-Schneider-Str. 2/Bau D15, 97080 Würzburg and
Universität Potsdam, Institut für Biochemie und Biologie, Abt. Zellbiologie,
Karl-Liebknecht-Strasse 24-25, 14476 Potsdam - Golm.

Although the DNA methyltransferase 2 family is highly conserved during evolution 
and recent reports suggested a dual specificity with stronger activity on
transfer RNA (tRNA) than DNA substrates, the biological function is still
obscure. We show that the Dictyostelium discoideum Dnmt2-homologue DnmA is an
active tRNA methyltransferase that modifies C38 in tRNA(Asp(GUC)) in vitro and in
vivo. By an ultraviolet-crosslinking and immunoprecipitation approach, we
identified further DnmA targets. This revealed specific tRNA fragments bound by
the enzyme and identified tRNA(Glu(CUC/UUC)) and tRNA(Gly(GCC)) as new but weaker
substrates for both human Dnmt2 and DnmA in vitro but apparently not in vivo.
Dnmt2 enzymes form transient covalent complexes with their substrates. The
dynamics of complex formation and complex resolution reflect methylation
efficiency in vitro. Quantitative PCR analyses revealed alterations in dnmA
expression during development, cell cycle and in response to temperature stress. 
However, dnmA expression only partially correlated with tRNA methylation in vivo.
Strikingly, dnmA expression in the laboratory strain AX2 was significantly lower 
than in the NC4 parent strain. As expression levels and binding of DnmA to a
target in vivo are apparently not necessarily accompanied by methylation, we
propose an additional biological function of DnmA apart from methylation.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkt634 
PMCID: PMC3794594
PMID: 23877245  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Cell Rep. 2013 Jul 25;4(2):255-61. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.06.029. Epub 2013
Jul 18.

NSun2-mediated cytosine-5 methylation of vault noncoding RNA determines its
processing into regulatory small RNAs.

Hussain S(1), Sajini AA, Blanco S, Dietmann S, Lombard P, Sugimoto Y, Paramor M, 
Gleeson JG, Odom DT, Ule J, Frye M.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust - Medical Research Council Cambridge Stem Cell Institute,
University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge, CB2 1QR, UK.

Autosomal-recessive loss of the NSUN2 gene has been identified as a causative
link to intellectual disability disorders in humans. NSun2 is an RNA
methyltransferase modifying cytosine-5 in transfer RNAs (tRNAs), yet the
identification of cytosine methylation in other RNA species has been hampered by 
the lack of sensitive and reliable molecular techniques. Here, we describe miCLIP
as an additional approach for identifying RNA methylation sites in
transcriptomes. miCLIP is a customized version of the
individual-nucleotide-resolution crosslinking and immunoprecipitation (iCLIP)
method. We confirm site-specific methylation in tRNAs and additional messenger
and noncoding RNAs (ncRNAs). Among these, vault ncRNAs contained six
NSun2-methylated cytosines, three of which were confirmed by RNA bisulfite
sequencing. Using patient cells lacking the NSun2 protein, we further show that
loss of cytosine-5 methylation in vault RNAs causes aberrant processing into
Argonaute-associated small RNA fragments that can function as microRNAs. Thus,
impaired processing of vault ncRNA may contribute to the etiology of
NSun2-deficiency human disorders.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.06.029 
PMCID: PMC3730056
PMID: 23871666  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Mol Cell. 2013 Jul 25;51(2):156-73. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2013.07.001.

Tandem stem-loops in roX RNAs act together to mediate X chromosome dosage
compensation in Drosophila.

Ilik IA(1), Quinn JJ, Georgiev P, Tavares-Cadete F, Maticzka D, Toscano S, Wan Y,
Spitale RC, Luscombe N, Backofen R, Chang HY, Akhtar A.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics, Stübeweg 51, 79108
Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2013 Jul 25;51(2):131-2.
    Nat Rev Genet. 2013 Sep;14(9):598.

Dosage compensation in Drosophila is an epigenetic phenomenon utilizing proteins 
and long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) for transcriptional upregulation of the male X 
chromosome. Here, by using UV crosslinking followed by deep sequencing, we show
that two enzymes in the Male-Specific Lethal complex, MLE RNA helicase and MSL2
ubiquitin ligase, bind evolutionarily conserved domains containing tandem
stem-loops in roX1 and roX2 RNAs in vivo. These domains constitute the minimal
RNA unit present in multiple copies in diverse arrangements for nucleation of the
MSL complex. MLE binds to these domains with distinct ATP-independent and
ATP-dependent behavior. Importantly, we show that different roX RNA domains have 
overlapping function, since only combinatorial mutations in the tandem stem-loops
result in severe loss of dosage compensation and consequently male-specific
lethality. We propose that repetitive structural motifs in lncRNAs could provide 
plasticity during multiprotein complex assemblies to ensure efficient targeting
in cis or in trans along chromosomes.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2013.07.001 
PMCID: PMC3804161
PMID: 23870142  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Trends Biochem Sci. 2013 Aug;38(8):386-93. doi: 10.1016/j.tibs.2013.05.004. Epub 
2013 Jul 3.

The differences between ICL repair during and outside of S phase.

Williams HL(1), Gottesman ME, Gautier J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Institute for Cancer Genetics,
Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

DNA interstrand crosslinks (ICLs) are complex lesions that block essential DNA
transactions including DNA replication, recombination, and RNA transcription.
Naturally occurring ICLs are rare, yet these lesions are the major cause of
toxicity following treatment with several classes of crosslinking cancer
chemotherapeutic drugs. ICLs are repaired during and outside of S phase by
pathways with overlapping as well as distinct features. Here, we discuss some
recent insights into the mechanisms of replication-dependent and
replication-independent repair of ICLs with special emphasis on the differences
between these repair pathways.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tibs.2013.05.004 
PMCID: PMC3763924
PMID: 23830640  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Exp Cell Res. 2013 Aug 15;319(14):2244-53. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2013.06.005. Epub
2013 Jun 22.

Roles of ChlR1 DNA helicase in replication recovery from DNA damage.

Shah N(1), Inoue A, Woo Lee S, Beishline K, Lahti JM, Noguchi E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Drexel University College of
Medicine, 245 N. 15th Street, Philadelphia, PA 19102, USA.

The ChlR1 DNA helicase is mutated in Warsaw breakage syndrome characterized by
developmental anomalies, chromosomal breakage, and sister chromatid cohesion
defects. However, the mechanism by which ChlR1 preserves genomic integrity is
largely unknown. Here, we describe the roles of ChlR1 in DNA replication
recovery. We show that ChlR1 depletion renders human cells highly sensitive to
cisplatin; an interstrand-crosslinking agent that causes stalled replication
forks. ChlR1 depletion also causes accumulation of DNA damage in response to
cisplatin, leading to a significant delay in resolution of DNA damage. We also
report that ChlR1-depleted cells display defects in the repair of double-strand
breaks induced by the I-PpoI endonuclease and bleomycin. Furthermore, we
demonstrate that ChlR1-depeleted cells show significant delays in replication
recovery after cisplatin treatment. Taken together, our results indicate that
ChlR1 plays an important role in efficient DNA repair during DNA replication,
which may facilitate efficient establishment of sister chromatid cohesion.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2013.06.005 
PMCID: PMC3752303
PMID: 23797032  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Genome Res. 2013 Oct;23(10):1636-50. doi: 10.1101/gr.157354.113. Epub 2013 Jun
13.

Global analyses of UPF1 binding and function reveal expanded scope of
nonsense-mediated mRNA decay.

Hurt JA(1), Robertson AD, Burge CB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02142, USA.

UPF1 is a DNA/RNA helicase with essential roles in nonsense-mediated mRNA decay
(NMD) and embryonic development. How UPF1 regulates target abundance and the
relationship between NMD and embryogenesis are not well understood. To explore
how NMD shapes the embryonic transcriptome, we integrated genome-wide analyses of
UPF1 binding locations, NMD-regulated gene expression, and translation in murine 
embryonic stem cells (mESCs). We identified over 200 direct UPF1 binding targets 
using crosslinking/immunoprecipitation-sequencing (CLIP-seq) and revealed a
repression pathway that involves 3' UTR binding by UPF1 and translation but is
independent of canonical targeting features involving 3' UTR length and stop
codon placement. Interestingly, NMD targeting of this set of mRNAs occurs in
other mouse tissues and is conserved in human. We also show, using ribosome
footprint profiling, that actively translated upstream open reading frames
(uORFs) are enriched in transcription factor mRNAs and predict mRNA repression by
NMD, while poorly translated mRNAs escape repression. Together, our results
identify novel NMD determinants and targets and provide context for understanding
the impact of UPF1 and NMD on the mESC transcriptome.

DOI: 10.1101/gr.157354.113 
PMCID: PMC3787261
PMID: 23766421  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Sep 15;22(18):3730-48. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt225. Epub 2013 May
21.

Enrichment of processed pseudogene transcripts in L1-ribonucleoprotein particles.

Mandal PK(1), Ewing AD, Hancks DC, Kazazian HH Jr.

Author information: 
(1)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine and Department of Pediatrics,
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.

Long INterspersed Elements (LINE-1s, L1s) are responsible for over one million
retrotransposon insertions and 8000 processed pseudogenes (PPs) in the human
genome. An active L1 encodes two proteins (ORF1p and ORF2p) that bind with L1 RNA
and form L1-ribonucleoprotein particles (RNPs). Although it is believed that the 
RNA-binding property of ORF1p is critical to recruit other mobile RNAs to the
RNP, the identity of recruited RNAs is largely unknown. Here, we used
crosslinking and immunoprecipitation followed by deep sequencing to identify RNA 
components of L1-RNPs. Our results show that in addition to retrotransposed RNAs 
[L1, Alu and SINE-VNTR-Alu (SVA)], L1-RNPs are enriched with cellular mRNAs,
which have PPs in the human genome. Using purified L1-RNPs, we show that
PP-source RNAs preferentially serve as ORF2p templates in a reverse transcriptase
assay. In addition, we find that exogenous ORF2p binds endogenous ORF1p, allowing
reverse transcription of the same PP-source RNAs. These data demonstrate that
interaction of a cellular RNA with the L1-RNP is an inside track to PP formation.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddt225 
PMCID: PMC3749862
PMID: 23696454  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Mol Cell. 2013 May 9;50(3):420-9. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2013.03.021. Epub 2013
Apr 25.

The magic spot: a ppGpp binding site on E. coli RNA polymerase responsible for
regulation of transcription initiation.

Ross W(1), Vrentas CE, Sanchez-Vazquez P, Gaal T, Gourse RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bacteriology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1550 Linden
Drive, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Microbiol. 2013 Jul;11(7):429.

The global regulatory nucleotide ppGpp ("magic spot") regulates transcription
from a large subset of Escherichia coli promoters, illustrating how small
molecules can control gene expression promoter-specifically by interacting with
RNA polymerase (RNAP) without binding to DNA. However, ppGpp's target site on
RNAP, and therefore its mechanism of action, has remained unclear. We report here
a binding site for ppGpp on E. coli RNAP, identified by crosslinking, protease
mapping, and analysis of mutant RNAPs that fail to respond to ppGpp. A strain
with a mutant ppGpp binding site displays properties characteristic of cells
defective for ppGpp synthesis. The binding site is at an interface of two RNAP
subunits, ω and β', and its position suggests an allosteric mechanism of action
involving restriction of motion between two mobile RNAP modules. Identification
of the binding site allows prediction of bacterial species in which ppGpp exerts 
its effects by targeting RNAP.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2013.03.021 
PMCID: PMC3654024
PMID: 23623682  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Haematologica. 2013 May;98(5):705-13. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2012.074187. Epub
2013 Apr 12.

Elevated levels of STAT1 in Fanconi anemia group A lymphoblasts correlate with
the cells' sensitivity to DNA interstrand crosslinking drugs.

Prieto-Remón I(1), Sánchez-Carrera D, López-Duarte M, Richard C, Pipaón C.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Hematología, Instituto de Formación e Investigación Marqués de
Valdecilla-IFIMAV, Santander, Spain.

Progressive bone marrow failure starting in the first decade of life is one of
the main characteristics of Fanconi anemia. Along with the bone marrow failure,
this pathology is characterized by congenital malformations, endocrine
dysfunction and an extraordinary predisposition to develop cancer. The fact that 
hematopoietic progenitor cells from subjects with Fanconi anemia are sensitive to
both DNA-interstrand crosslinking agents and inflammatory cytokines, which are
aberrantly overproduced in these patients, has led to different explanations for 
the causes of the bone marrow failure. We analyzed STAT1 expression in
lymphoblastoid cell lines derived from patients with Fanconi anemia group A and
correlated this with aspects of the Fanconi anemia phenotype such as sensitivity 
to genotoxic agents or to inhibitory cytokines. We provide evidence of
overexpression of STAT1 in FANCA-deficient cells which has both transcriptional
and post-translational components, and is related to the constitutive activation 
of ERK in Fanconi anemia group A cells, since it can be reverted by treatment
with U0126. STAT1 phosphorylation was not defective in the lymphoblasts, so these
cells accumulated higher levels of active STAT1 in response to interferon gamma, 
probably in relation to their greater sensitivity to this cytokine. On the other 
hand, inhibition of STAT1 by genetic or chemical means reverted the
hypersensitivity of Fanconi anemia group A lymphoblasts to DNA interstrand
crosslinking agents. Our data provide an explanation for the mixed sensitivity of
Fanconi anemia group A cells to both genotoxic stress and inflammatory cytokines 
and indicate new targets for the treatment of bone marrow failure in these
patients.

DOI: 10.3324/haematol.2012.074187 
PMCID: PMC3640113
PMID: 23585528  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Methods. 2013 Sep 15;63(2):119-25. doi: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2013.03.033. Epub 2013
Apr 10.

Identifying Argonaute binding sites in Caenorhabditis elegans using iCLIP.

Broughton JP(1), Pasquinelli AE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA
92093-0349, USA.

The identification of endogenous targets remains an important challenge in
understanding microRNA (miRNA) function. Past approaches using in silico methods 
and reporter constructs lack biological context that may enhance or inhibit
target recognition. To address these limitations, several labs have utilized
crosslinking and immunoprecipitation (CLIP) of Argonaute (Ago) proteins to
identify miRNA targets. Recently, the Ule Lab introduced individual-nucleotide
resolution CLIP (iCLIP) to increase the sensitivity of identifying protein-RNA
interaction sites. Here we adapt the iCLIP protocol for use in Caenorhabditis
elegans to identify endogenous sites targeted by the worm Argonaute (ALG-1)
primarily responsible for miRNA function.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2013.03.033 
PMCID: PMC3749250
PMID: 23583680  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Aug;1833(8):1832-43. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2013.03.029. Epub 2013 Apr 8.

Human three prime exonuclease TREX1 is induced by genotoxic stress and involved
in protection of glioma and melanoma cells to anticancer drugs.

Tomicic MT(1), Aasland D, Nikolova T, Kaina B, Christmann M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology, University Medical Center, Mainz, Germany.

To counteract genotoxic stress, DNA repair functions are in effect. Most of them 
are constitutively expressed while some of them can be up-regulated depending on 
the level of DNA damage. In human cells, only few DNA repair functions are
subject of induction following DNA damage, and thus there is a need to identify
and characterize inducible repair functions more thoroughly. Here, we provide
evidence that the "three prime exonuclease I" (TREX1) is up-regulated in human
fibroblasts and cancer cells on mRNA and protein level. Transcriptional
upregulation of TREX1 was observed upon exposure to ultraviolet light and various
anticancer drugs in glioma and malignant melanoma cells. Induction of TREX1 was
found following treatment with the crosslinking alkylating agents nimustine,
carmustine, fotemustine and the topoisomerase I inhibitor topotecan, but not
following temozolomide, etoposide and ionizing radiation. Induction of TREX1
following DNA damage requires the AP-1 components c-Jun and c-Fos, as shown by
siRNA knockdown, EMSA experiments, ChIP analysis and reporter assays with the
TREX1 promoter and constructs harboring mutations in the AP-1 binding site. To
analyze whether TREX1 expression impacts the sensitivity of cancer cells to
therapeutics, TREX1 expression was down-regulated by siRNA in malignant glioma
and melanoma cells. TREX1 knockdown resulted in enhanced cell death following
nimustine, fotemustine and topotecan and to a reduced recovery from the
anticancer drug induced block to replication. The data revealed that induction of
TREX1 is a survival response evoked by various genotoxic anticancer drugs and
identified TREX1 as a potential therapeutic target for anticancer therapy.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2013.03.029 
PMID: 23578789  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


132. J Control Release. 2013 Aug 10;169(3):266-75. doi: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2013.02.008.
Epub 2013 Feb 18.

Carbohydrate-interactive pDNA and siRNA gene vectors based on boronic acid
functionalized poly(amido amine)s.

Piest M(1), Ankoné M, Engbersen JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Chemistry, MIRA Institute for Biomedical Technology
and Technical Medicine, Faculty of Science and Technology, University of Twente, 
P.O. Box 217, 7500 AE Enschede, The Netherlands.

In order to evaluate the influence of incorporation of boronic acid groups on the
properties of poly(amido amine)s as gene vectors, a novel poly(amido amine)
copolymer p(CBA-ABOL/2AMPBA) containing ortho-aminomethylphenylboronic acid
(2AMPBA) moieties was prepared by Michael-type polyaddition of a mixture of
1,4-aminobutanol (ABOL) and 2-((4-aminobutylamino)methyl)phenyl boronic acid to
N,N'-cystamine bisacrylamide (CBA). It appeared that the presence of the boronic 
acid moieties as side groups along the polymer chain strongly enhances the
stability of the self-assembled nanoparticles and nanosized polyplexes formed
from this polymer; no aggregation was observed after storage for 6days at 37°C.
This strong stabilization can be attributed to intermolecular Lewis acid-base
interactions between the 2AMPBA groups and the alcohol and amine groups present
in the polymer, leading to dynamical (reversible) crosslinking in the
nanoparticles. Moreover, since the boronic acids can reversibly form boronic
esters with vicinal diol groups, the presence of the 2AMPBA groups add
carbohydrate-interactive properties to these polymers that strongly influence
their behavior as gene delivery vectors. DNA transfection with p(CBA-ABOL/2AMPBA)
polyplexes gave transfection efficiencies that were approximately similar to
commercial PEI in different cell lines (COS-7, HUH-6 and H1299-Fluc), but lower
than those obtained with reference polyplexes from p(CBA-ABOL). It is
hypothesized that the uptake of the boronated polyplexes is suppressed by binding
to the glycocalyx of the cells. This is supported by the observation that
addition of sorbitol or dextran to the transfection medium significantly enhances
the transfection efficiency, which can be attributed to increased cellular uptake
of the polyplexes due to boronic ester formation with these agents. AFM, SEM and 
confocal microscopy showed that polyplexes of p(CBA-ABOL/2AMPBA) become decorated
with a dextran layer in the presence of 0.9% (w/v) dextran in the polyplex
medium. In siRNA-mediated gene silencing experiments the use of
p(CBA-ABOL/2AMPBA) as polymeric vector gave a knockdown of luciferase expression 
in H1229-Fluc cells of 35%. Also in this case addition of 0.9% (w/v) sorbitol or 
dextran to the transfection medium strongly increased the knockdown efficiency to
59% and 76%, respectively.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2013.02.008 
PMID: 23428840  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2013 Mar;97(6):2661-70. doi:
10.1007/s00253-013-4708-1. Epub 2013 Feb 6.

Dynamic chromatin remodelling of ciliate macronuclear DNA as determined by an
optimized chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) method for Paramecium tetraurelia.

Cheaib M(1), Simon M.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Biology, Molecular Protistology, University of Kaiserslautern,
Gottlieb-Daimler Straße Building 14, 67663 Kaiserslautern, Germany.

We report the detailed evaluation of crucial parameters for chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) of macronuclear DNA in the unicellular eukaryote
Paramecium tetraurelia. Optimized parameters include crosslinking conditions,
chromatin sonication and antibody titration thus providing a detailed protocol
for successful ChIP in P. tetraurelia. As this ciliate is bacterivorous and RNAi 
by feeding represents a powerful tool for analysis of gene function, we moreover 
determined the effects of ingested nucleic acids by food bacteria. Feasibility of
our protocol is demonstrated by characterisation of chromatin remodelling at
promoters of cytosolic HSP70 isoforms during transcriptional activation under
heat shock conditions by analyzing RNA abundance, nucleosome occupancy and levels
of H3 lysine 9 acetylation.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-013-4708-1 
PMID: 23385475  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Sci Rep. 2012;2:603. doi: 10.1038/srep00603. Epub 2012 Aug 28.

Widespread binding of FUS along nascent RNA regulates alternative splicing in the
brain.

Rogelj B(1), Easton LE, Bogu GK, Stanton LW, Rot G, Curk T, Zupan B, Sugimoto Y, 
Modic M, Haberman N, Tollervey J, Fujii R, Takumi T, Shaw CE, Ule J.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Neurodegeneration Research, King's College London, Institute of
Psychiatry, De Crespigny Park, London, UK.

Fused in sarcoma (FUS) and TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43) are RNA-binding
proteins pathogenetically linked to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and
frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD), but it is not known if they regulate
the same transcripts. We addressed this question using crosslinking and
immunoprecipitation (iCLIP) in mouse brain, which showed that FUS binds along the
whole length of the nascent RNA with limited sequence specificity to GGU and
related motifs. A saw-tooth binding pattern in long genes demonstrated that FUS
remains bound to pre-mRNAs until splicing is completed. Analysis of FUS(-/-)
brain demonstrated a role for FUS in alternative splicing, with increased
crosslinking of FUS in introns around the repressed exons. We did not observe a
significant overlap in the RNA binding sites or the exons regulated by FUS and
TDP-43. Nevertheless, we found that both proteins regulate genes that function in
neuronal development.

DOI: 10.1038/srep00603 
PMCID: PMC3429604
PMID: 22934129  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Pathol Oncol Res. 2013 Jan;19(1):41-53. doi: 10.1007/s12253-012-9556-2. Epub 2012
Aug 15.

The non-crosslinking fixative RCL2®-CS100 is compatible with both pathology
diagnosis and molecular analyses.

Boissière-Michot F(1), Denouël A, Boulle N, Guillaume C, Orsetti B, Lopez-Crapez 
E, Chateau MC, Bibeau F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Val d'Aurelle Cancer Institute, Montpellier 34 298,
France. Florence.Boissiere@montpellier.unicancer.fr

Formalin is the key agent for tissue fixation and pathological diagnosis.
However, it poorly preserves nucleic acids and this can impair molecular studies.
An alternative to formalin would be a fixative which can allow both morphologic
and molecular analyses. To assess the suitability of such a fixative, breast
(n = 11) and colon (n = 12) tumor samples were fixed in the non cross-linking
RCL2®-CS100 fixative and compared to paired formalin-fixed and to frozen samples,
the current standards for histology and molecular analyses, respectively.
Sections from RCL2®-CS100-fixed samples showed good preservation of cellular and 
architectural morphology, suitable for routine diagnosis. Although some
antibodies required change in the immunohistochemical procedures, quality of the 
immunohistochemical staining was comparable to that obtained after formalin
fixation. HER2 chromogenic in situ hybridization was also successfully performed.
High quality DNA could be isolated from RCL2®-CS100-fixed cancer tissues as
evidenced by successful amplification of large DNA fragment, CGH array, KRAS and 
microsatellites genotyping. The quality of RNA from RCL2®-CS100-fixed samples was
slightly decreased in comparison to that of RNA isolated from frozen samples, as 
evidenced by a decreased RNA integrity number but remained exploitable for
molecular assays. Our results support the use of the RCL2®-CS100 fixative for
histological diagnosis and recovery of high-quality nucleic acids for molecular
applications. However, specific procedures for tissue handing and processing,
essential to provide high-quality specimens, could limit its use to small target 
lesions which cannot be frozen without impairing their pathological evaluation.

DOI: 10.1007/s12253-012-9556-2 
PMID: 22893391  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


136. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e33035. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0033035. Epub 2012 Mar 12.

Identification of nucleic acid binding sites on translin-associated factor X
(TRAX) protein.

Gupta GD(1), Kumar V.

Author information: 
(1)High Pressure & Synchrotron Radiation Physics Division, Bhabha Atomic Research
Centre, Mumbai, India.

Translin and TRAX proteins play roles in very important cellular processes such
as DNA recombination, spatial and temporal expression of mRNA, and in siRNA
processing. Translin forms a homomeric nucleic acid binding complex and binds to 
ssDNA and RNA. However, a mutant translin construct that forms homomeric complex 
lacking nucleic acid binding activity is able to form fully active heteromeric
translin-TRAX complex when co-expressed with TRAX. A substantial progress has
been made in identifying translin sites that mediate its binding activity, while 
TRAX was thought not to bind DNA or RNA on its own. We here for the first time
demonstrate nucleic acid binding to TRAX by crosslinking radiolabeled ssDNA to
heteromeric translin-TRAX complex using UV-laser. The TRAX and translin,
photochemically crosslinked with ssDNA, were individually detected on SDS-PAGE.
We mutated two motifs in TRAX and translin, designated B2 and B3, to help define 
the nucleic acid binding sites in the TRAX sequence. The most pronounced effect
was observed in the mutants of B3 motif that impaired nucleic acid binding
activity of the heteromeric complexes. We suggest that both translin and TRAX are
binding competent and contribute to the nucleic acid binding activity.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0033035 
PMCID: PMC3299731
PMID: 22427937  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jan 3;109(1):279-84. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1114204109.
Epub 2011 Dec 19.

Murine cytomegalovirus encodes a miR-27 inhibitor disguised as a target.

Libri V(1), Helwak A, Miesen P, Santhakumar D, Borger JG, Kudla G, Grey F,
Tollervey D, Buck AH.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Immunity, Infection and Evolution, University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh EH9 3JT, United Kingdom.

Individual microRNAs (miRNAs) are rapidly down-regulated during conditions of
cellular activation and infection, but factors mediating miRNA turnover are
poorly understood. Infection of mouse cells with murine cytomegalovirus (MCMV)
induces the rapid down-regulation of an antiviral cellular miRNA, miR-27. Here,
we identify a transcript produced by MCMV that binds to miR-27 and mediates its
degradation. UV-crosslinking and high-throughput sequencing [CRAC
(UV-crosslinking and analysis of cDNA)] identified MCMV RNA segments associated
with the miRNA-binding protein Argonaute 2 (Ago2). A cluster of hits mapped to a 
predicted miR-27-binding site in the 3'UTR of the previously uncharacterized ORF,
m169. The expression kinetics of the m169 transcript correlated with degradation 
of miR-27 during infection, and m169 expression inhibited miR-27 functional
activity in a reporter assay. siRNA knockdown of m169 demonstrated its
requirement for miR-27 degradation following infection and did not affect other
host miRNAs. Substitution of the miR-27-binding site in m169 to create
complementarity to a different cellular miRNA, miR-24, resulted in
down-regulation of only miR-24 following infection. The m169 transcript is
cytoplasmic, capped, polyadenylated, and interacts with miRNA-27 through seed
pairing: characteristic features of the normal messenger RNA (mRNA) targets of
miRNAs. This virus-host interaction reveals a mode of miRNA regulation in which a
mRNA directs the degradation of a miRNA. We speculate that RNA-mediated miRNA
degradation could be a more general viral strategy for manipulating host cells.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1114204109 
PMCID: PMC3252920
PMID: 22184245  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Dev Biol. 2012 Jan 1;361(1):79-89. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.10.008. Epub 2011
Oct 14.

Filamin C plays an essential role in the maintenance of the structural integrity 
of cardiac and skeletal muscles, revealed by the medaka mutant zacro.

Fujita M(1), Mitsuhashi H, Isogai S, Nakata T, Kawakami A, Nonaka I, Noguchi S,
Hayashi YK, Nishino I, Kudo A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Information, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 4259-B-33
Nagatsuta, Yokohama 226-8501, Japan.

Filamin C is an actin-crosslinking protein that is specifically expressed in
cardiac and skeletal muscles. Although mutations in the filamin C gene cause
human myopathy with cardiac involvement, the function of filamin C in vivo is not
yet fully understood. Here we report a medaka mutant, zacro (zac), that displayed
an enlarged heart, caused by rupture of the myocardiac wall, and progressive
skeletal muscle degeneration in late embryonic stages. We identified zac to be a 
homozygous nonsense mutation in the filamin C (flnc) gene. The medaka filamin C
protein was found to be localized at myotendinous junctions, sarcolemma, and
Z-disks in skeletal muscle, and at intercalated disks in the heart. zac embryos
showed prominent myofibrillar degeneration at myotendinous junctions, detachment 
of myofibrils from sarcolemma and intercalated disks, and focal Z-disk
destruction. Importantly, the expression of γ-actin, which we observed to have a 
strong subcellular localization at myotendinous junctions, was specifically
reduced in zac mutant myotomes. Inhibition of muscle contraction by anesthesia
alleviated muscle degeneration in the zac mutant. These results suggest that
filamin C plays an indispensable role in the maintenance of the structural
integrity of cardiac and skeletal muscles for support against mechanical stress.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.10.008 
PMID: 22020047  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Wiley Interdiscip Rev RNA. 2010 Sep-Oct;1(2):266-86. doi: 10.1002/wrna.31. Epub
2010 Aug 2.

HITS-CLIP: panoramic views of protein-RNA regulation in living cells.

Darnell RB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neuro-Oncology, The Rockefeller University, Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, New York, NY 10065, USA. darnelr@rockefeller.edu

The study of gene regulation in cells has recently begun to shift from a period
dominated by the study of transcription factor-DNA interactions to a new focus on
RNA regulation. This was sparked by the still-emerging recognition of the central
role for RNA in cellular complexity emanating from the RNA World hypothesis, and 
has been facilitated by technologic advances, in particular high throughput RNA
sequencing and crosslinking methods (RNA-Seq, CLIP, and HITS-CLIP). This study
will place these advances in context, and, focusing on CLIP, will explain the
method, what it can be used for, and how to approach using it. Examples of the
successes, limitations, and future of the technique will be discussed.

Copyright © 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/wrna.31 
PMCID: PMC3222227
PMID: 21935890  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


140. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e24067. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0024067. Epub 2011 Aug 30.

Annexin A2 binds RNA and reduces the frameshifting efficiency of infectious
bronchitis virus.

Kwak H(1), Park MW, Jeong S.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Lab for RNA Cell Biology, BK21 Graduate Program for RNA
Biology, Institute of Nanosensor and Biotechnology, Department of Molecular
Biology, Dankook University, Gyeonggi-do, Republic of Korea.

Annexin A2 (ANXA2) is a protein implicated in diverse cellular functions,
including exocytosis, DNA synthesis and cell proliferation. It was recently
proposed to be involved in RNA metabolism because it was shown to associate with 
some cellular mRNA. Here, we identified ANXA2 as a RNA binding protein (RBP) that
binds IBV (Infectious Bronchitis Virus) pseudoknot RNA. We first confirmed the
binding of ANXA2 to IBV pseudoknot RNA by ultraviolet crosslinking and showed its
binding to RNA pseudoknot with ANXA2 protein in vitro and in the cells. Since the
RNA pseudoknot located in the frameshifting region of IBV was used as bait for
cellular RBPs, we tested whether ANXA2 could regulate the frameshfting of IBV
pseudoknot RNA by dual luciferase assay. Overexpression of ANXA2 significantly
reduced the frameshifting efficiency from IBV pseudoknot RNA and knockdown of the
protein strikingly increased the frameshifting efficiency. The results suggest
that ANXA2 is a cellular RBP that can modulate the frameshifting efficiency of
viral RNA, enabling it to act as an anti-viral cellular protein, and hinting at
roles in RNA metabolism for other cellular mRNAs.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0024067 
PMCID: PMC3168876
PMID: 21918681  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Nat Nanotechnol. 2011 Sep 11;6(10):658-67. doi: 10.1038/nnano.2011.105.

Thermodynamically stable RNA three-way junction for constructing multifunctional 
nanoparticles for delivery of therapeutics.

Shu D(1), Shu Y, Haque F, Abdelmawla S, Guo P.

Author information: 
(1)Nanobiomedical Center, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio 45267, USA.

RNA nanoparticles have applications in the treatment of cancers and viral
infection; however, the instability of RNA nanoparticles has hindered their
development for therapeutic applications. The lack of covalent linkage or
crosslinking in nanoparticles causes dissociation in vivo. Here we show that the 
packaging RNA of bacteriophage phi29 DNA packaging motor can be assembled from
3-6 pieces of RNA oligomers without the use of metal salts. Each RNA oligomer
contains a functional module that can be a receptor-binding ligand, aptamer,
short interfering RNA or ribozyme. When mixed together, they self-assemble into
thermodynamically stable tri-star nanoparticles with a three-way junction core.
These nanoparticles are resistant to 8 M urea denaturation, are stable in serum
and remain intact at extremely low concentrations. The modules remain functional 
in vitro and in vivo, suggesting that the three-way junction core can be used as 
a platform for building a variety of multifunctional nanoparticles. We studied 25
different three-way junction motifs in biological RNA and found only one other
motif that shares characteristics similar to the three-way junction of phi29
pRNA.

DOI: 10.1038/nnano.2011.105 
PMCID: PMC3189281
PMID: 21909084  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Insect Biochem Mol Biol. 2011 Nov;41(11):881-90. doi: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2011.08.002.
Epub 2011 Aug 23.

Molecular and functional characterisation of resilin across three insect orders.

Lyons RE(1), Wong DC, Kim M, Lekieffre N, Huson MG, Vuocolo T, Merritt DJ, Nairn 
KM, Dudek DM, Colgrave ML, Elvin CM.

Author information: 
(1)CSIRO Livestock Industries, St Lucia, QLD 4067, Australia.
Russell.Lyons@csiro.au

Resilin is an important elastomeric protein of insects, with roles in the storage
and release of energy during a variety of different functional categories
including flight and jumping. To date, resilin genes and protein function have
been characterised only in a small number of flying insects, despite their
importance in fleas and other jumping insects. Microscopy and immunostaining
studies of resilin in flea demonstrate the presence of resilin pads in the
pleural arch at the top of the hind legs, a region responsible for the flea's
jumping ability. A degenerate primer approach was used to amplify resilin gene
transcripts from total RNA isolated from flea (Ctenocephalides felis), buffalo
fly (Haematobia irritans exigua) and dragonfly (Aeshna sp.) pharate adults, and
full-length transcripts were successfully isolated. Two isoforms (A and B) were
amplified from each of flea and buffalo fly, and isoform B only in dragonfly.
Flea and buffalo fly isoform B transcripts were expressed in an Escherichia coli 
expression system, yielding soluble recombinant proteins Cf-resB and Hi-resB
respectively. Protein structure and mechanical properties of each protein before 
and after crosslinking were assessed. This study shows that resilin gene and
protein sequences are broadly conserved and that crosslinked recombinant resilin 
proteins share similar mechanical properties from flying to jumping insects. A
combined use of degenerate primers and polyclonal sera will likely facilitate
characterisation of resilin genes from other insect and invertebrate orders.

Crown Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2011.08.002 
PMID: 21878390  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Chem Biol. 2011 Aug 26;18(8):988-99. doi: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2011.06.007.

XPF-dependent DNA breaks and RNA polymerase II arrest induced by antitumor DNA
interstrand crosslinking-mimetic alkaloids.

Feuerhahn S(1), Giraudon C, Martínez-Díez M, Bueren-Calabuig JA, Galmarini CM,
Gago F, Egly JM.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/UdS, BP 163, 67404 Illkirch Cedex, CU Strasbourg, France.

Trabectedin and Zalypsis are two potent anticancer tetrahydroisoquinoline
alkaloids that can form a covalent bond with the amino group of a guanine in
selected triplets of DNA duplexes and eventually give rise to double-strand
breaks. Using well-defined in vitro and in vivo assays, we show that the
resulting DNA adducts stimulate, in a concentration-dependent manner, cleavage by
the XPF/ERCC1 nuclease on the strand opposite to that bonded by the drug. They
also inhibit RNA synthesis by: (1) preventing binding of transcription factors
like Sp1 to DNA, and (2) arresting elongating RNA polymerase II at the same
nucleotide position regardless of the strand they are located on. Structural
models provide a rationale for these findings and highlight the similarity
between this type of DNA modification and an interstrand crosslink.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2011.06.007 
PMID: 21867914  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


144. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e23053. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023053. Epub 2011 Aug 12.

ATR-p53 restricts homologous recombination in response to replicative stress but 
does not limit DNA interstrand crosslink repair in lung cancer cells.

Sirbu BM(1), Lachmayer SJ, Wülfing V, Marten LM, Clarkson KE, Lee LW, Gheorghiu
L, Zou L, Powell SN, Dahm-Daphi J, Willers H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Radiation Oncology, Massachusetts General
Hospital Cancer Center, Charlestown, Massachusetts, United States of America.

Homologous recombination (HR) is required for the restart of collapsed DNA
replication forks and error-free repair of DNA double-strand breaks (DSB).
However, unscheduled or hyperactive HR may lead to genomic instability and
promote cancer development. The cellular factors that restrict HR processes in
mammalian cells are only beginning to be elucidated. The tumor suppressor p53 has
been implicated in the suppression of HR though it has remained unclear why p53, 
as the guardian of the genome, would impair an error-free repair process. Here,
we show for the first time that p53 downregulates foci formation of the RAD51
recombinase in response to replicative stress in H1299 lung cancer cells in a
manner that is independent of its role as a transcription factor. We find that
this downregulation of HR is not only completely dependent on the binding site of
p53 with replication protein A but also the ATR/ATM serine 15 phosphorylation
site. Genetic analysis suggests that ATR but not ATM kinase modulates p53's
function in HR. The suppression of HR by p53 can be bypassed under experimental
conditions that cause DSB either directly or indirectly, in line with p53's role 
as a guardian of the genome. As a result, transactivation-inactive p53 does not
compromise the resistance of H1299 cells to the interstrand crosslinking agent
mitomycin C. Altogether, our data support a model in which p53 plays an
anti-recombinogenic role in the ATR-dependent mammalian replication checkpoint
but does not impair a cell's ability to use HR for the removal of DSB induced by 
cytotoxic agents.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023053 
PMCID: PMC3155521
PMID: 21857991  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Mol Cell. 2011 Aug 5;43(3):353-68. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2011.05.035.

The Ewing sarcoma protein regulates DNA damage-induced alternative splicing.

Paronetto MP(1), Miñana B, Valcárcel J.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Regulació Genòmica, Barcelona, Spain.

The Ewing sarcoma (EWS) protein is a member of the TET (TLS/EWS/TAF15) family of 
RNA- and DNA-binding proteins whose expression is altered in cancer. We report
that EWS depletion results in alternative splicing changes of genes involved in
DNA repair and genotoxic stress signaling, including ABL1, CHEK2, and MAP4K2.
Chromatin and RNA crosslinking immunoprecipitation results indicate that EWS
cotranscriptionally binds to its target RNAs. This association is reduced upon
irradiation of cells with ultraviolet light, concomitant with transient
enrichment of EWS in nucleoli and with alternative splicing changes that parallel
those induced by EWS depletion and that lead to reduced c-ABL protein expression.
Consistent with the functional relevance of EWS-mediated alternative splicing
regulation in DNA damage response, EWS depletion reduces cell viability and
proliferation upon UV irradiation, effects that are attenuated by restoring c-ABL
expression. These results provide insights into posttranscriptional mechanisms of
DNA damage response by a TET protein.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2011.05.035 
PMID: 21816343  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


146. EMBO J. 2011 Aug 2;30(19):4006-19. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.256.

A cluster of ribosome synthesis factors regulate pre-rRNA folding and 5.8S rRNA
maturation by the Rat1 exonuclease.

Granneman S(1), Petfalski E, Tollervey D.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology and Centre for Systems Biology at
Edinburgh, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Scotland.
sgrannem@staffmail.ed.ac.uk

The 5'-exonuclease Rat1 degrades pre-rRNA spacer fragments and processes the
5'-ends of the 5.8S and 25S rRNAs. UV crosslinking revealed multiple Rat1-binding
sites across the pre-rRNA, consistent with its known functions. The major 5.8S
5'-end is generated by Rat1 digestion of the internal transcribed spacer 1 (ITS1)
spacer from cleavage site A(3). Processing from A(3) requires the 'A(3)-cluster' 
proteins, including Cic1, Erb1, Nop7, Nop12 and Nop15, which show interdependent 
pre-rRNA binding. Surprisingly, A(3)-cluster factors were not crosslinked close
to site A(3), but bound sites around the 5.8S 3'- and 25S 5'-regions, which are
base paired in mature ribosomes, and in the ITS2 spacer that separates these
rRNAs. In contrast, Nop4, a protein required for endonucleolytic cleavage in
ITS1, binds the pre-rRNA near the 5'-end of 5.8S. ITS2 was reported to undergo
structural remodelling. In vivo chemical probing indicates that A(3)-cluster
binding is required for this reorganization, potentially regulating the timing of
processing. We predict that Nop4 and the A(3) cluster establish long-range
interactions between the 5.8S and 25S rRNAs, which are subsequently maintained by
ribosomal protein binding.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2011.256 
PMCID: PMC3209772
PMID: 21811236  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Radiother Oncol. 2011 Oct;101(1):190-7. doi: 10.1016/j.radonc.2011.05.059. Epub
2011 Jun 29.

Hypoxia disrupts the Fanconi anemia pathway and sensitizes cells to chemotherapy 
through regulation of UBE2T.

Ramaekers CH(1), van den Beucken T, Meng A, Kassam S, Thoms J, Bristow RG,
Wouters BG.

Author information: 
(1)Ontario Cancer Institute and Campbell Family Institute for Cancer Research,
University Health Network, Toronto, Canada.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Hypoxia is a common feature of the microenvironment of
solid tumors which has been shown to promote malignancy and poor patient outcome 
through multiple mechanisms. The association of hypoxia with more aggressive
disease may be due in part to recently identified links between hypoxia and
genetic instability. For example, hypoxia has been demonstrated to impede DNA
repair by down-regulating the homologous recombination protein RAD51. Here we
investigated hypoxic regulation of UBE2T, a ubiquitin ligase required in the
Fanconi anemia (FA) DNA repair pathway.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We analysed UBE2T expression by microarray, quantitative
PCR and western blot analysis in a panel of cancer cell lines as a function of
oxygen concentration. The importance of this regulation was assessed by measuring
cell survival in response to DNA damaging agents under normoxia or hypoxia.
Finally, HIF dependency was determined using knockdown cell lines and RCC4 cells 
which constitutively express HIF1α.
RESULTS: Hypoxia results in rapid and potent reductions in mRNA levels of UBE2T
in a panel of cancer cell lines. Reduced UBE2T mRNA expression is HIF independent
and was not due to changes in mRNA or protein stability, but rather reflected
reduced promoter activity. Exposure of tumor cells to hypoxia greatly increased
their sensitivity to treatment with the interstrand crosslinking (ICL) agent
mitomycin C.
CONCLUSIONS: Exposure to hypoxic conditions down-regulates UBE2T expression which
correlates with an increased sensitivity to crosslinking agents consistent with a
defective Fanconi anemia pathway. This pathway can potentially be exploited to
target hypoxic cells in tumors.

Crown Copyright Â© 2011. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.radonc.2011.05.059 
PMID: 21722982  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Clin Pathol. 2011 Nov;64(11):960-7. doi: 10.1136/jclinpath-2011-200152. Epub
2011 Jun 29.

Formaldehyde substitute fixatives: effects on nucleic acid preservation.

Moelans CB(1), Oostenrijk D, Moons MJ, van Diest PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The
Netherlands. cmoelans@umcutrecht.nl

AIMS: In surgical pathology, formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissues are
increasingly being used as a source of DNA and RNA for molecular assays in
addition to histopathological evaluation. However, the commonly used formalin
fixative is carcinogenic, and its crosslinking impairs DNA and RNA quality.
METHODS: The suitability of three new presumably less toxic, crosslinking
(F-Solv) and non-crosslinking (FineFIX, RCL2) alcohol-based fixatives was tested 
for routine molecular pathology in comparison with neutral buffered formalin
(NBF) as gold standard. Size ladder PCR, epidermal growth factor receptor
sequence analysis, microsatellite instability (MSI), chromogenic (CISH),
fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH) and qPCR were performed.
RESULTS: The alcohol-based non-crosslinking fixatives (FineFIX and RCL2) resulted
in a higher DNA yield and quality compared with crosslinking fixatives (NBF and
F-Solv). Size ladder PCR resulted in a shorter amplicon size (300 bp) for both
crosslinking fixatives compared with the non-crosslinking fixatives (400 bp). All
four fixatives were directly applicable for MSI and epidermal growth factor
receptor sequence analysis. All fixatives except F-Solv showed clear signals in
CISH and FISH. RNA yield and quality were superior after non-crosslinking
fixation. qPCR resulted in lower Ct values for RCL2 and FineFIX.
CONCLUSION: The alcohol-based non-crosslinking fixatives performed better than
crosslinking fixatives with regard to DNA and RNA yield, quality and
applicability in molecular diagnostics. Given the higher yield, less starting
material may be necessary, thereby increasing the applicability of biopsies for
molecular studies.

DOI: 10.1136/jclinpath-2011-200152 
PMID: 21715573  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


149. J Control Release. 2011 Oct 30;155(2):184-92. doi: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2011.06.008.
Epub 2011 Jun 21.

An injectable synthetic immune-priming center mediates efficient T-cell class
switching and T-helper 1 response against B cell lymphoma.

Singh A(1), Qin H, Fernandez I, Wei J, Lin J, Kwak LW, Roy K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, The University of Texas, Austin, TX
78712, USA.

Patients with malignant non-Hodgkin's lymphomas (NHL) of B-cell lineages relapse 
despite initial anti-tumor response to chemotherapy or antibody treatments.
Failure to eliminate the tumor is often because of inadequate priming, low cell
numbers and suboptimal phenotype of effector T cells. Here we describe a new
biomaterial-based controlled-release paradigm to treat weakly immunogenic NHLs by
in-situ amplifying the number of functional, antigen-specific T-helper 1 (Th1)
cells following immunotherapy. An injectable, synthetic immune priming center
(sIPC) consisting of an in-situ crosslinking, chemokine-carrying hydrogel and
both DNA- and siRNA dual-loaded microparticles, is reported. This sIPC chemo
attracts a large number of immature dendritic cells (DCs) at the site of
administration and efficiently co-delivers both DNA antigens and interleukin-10
(IL10)-silencing siRNA to those cells. Using a murine model of A20 B cell
lymphoma, we demonstrate that combination of DNA-antigen delivery and IL10
silencing, synergistically activate recruited immature DCs and cause a strong
shift towards Th1 response while suppressing Th2 and Th17 cytokines. sIPC-based
immunotherapy showed 45% more CD8+ cytotoxic T cell (CTL) response and 53%
stronger CD4+ CTL activity compared to naked DNA vaccine. In addition, in-vivo
sIPC immunization induced significant protection (p<0.01) against subsequent
tumor challenge. Such a multi-modal, injectable system that simultaneously
delivers chemokines, siRNA and DNA antigens to DCs marks a new approach to
in-situ priming and modulation during immunotherapy and could provide effective
vaccination strategies against cancers and infectious diseases.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2011.06.008 
PMID: 21708196  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Macromol Rapid Commun. 2010 Jul 1;31(13):1207-11. doi: 10.1002/marc.200900872.
Epub 2010 May 25.

Photocrosslinked DNA nanospheres for drug delivery.

Roh YH(1), Lee JB, Tan SJ, Kim B, Park H, Rice EJ, Luo D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological and Environmental Engineering, Cornell University,
Ithaca, New York 14850, USA.

DNA has been employed as both a genetic and a generic material. X-shaped DNA
(X-DNA) in particular has four branched arms, providing multivalent
functionalities that can allow for simultaneous multiple crosslinking. Here we
report the synthesis of four acrylate-functionalized X-DNA monomers that can be
further photocrosslinked to form monodisperse and tunable DNA nanospheres. In
particular, the size and surface charge of these nanospheres were precisely
controlled in a linear fashion, simply by tuning the monomer concentration in the
reaction. The morphology and surface properties of the nanospheres were
characterized using FT-IR, HPLC, TEM, AFM, zeta potential, and DLS analysis. In
vitro studies in mammalian cells revealed that these DNA nanospheres demonstrated
significant efficacy in the delivery of doxorubicin. These results highlight the 
potential of using DNA as material building blocks to design novel nanocarriers
with properties tailored for the delivery of drugs in general and DNA/RNA in
particular.

Copyright © 2010 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/marc.200900872 
PMID: 21590877 


151. J Clin Lab Anal. 2011;25(3):166-73. doi: 10.1002/jcla.20451.

Evidence for qualified quantitative mRNA analysis in formalin-fixed and
paraffin-embedded colorectal carcinoma cells and tissue.

Lu X(1), van der Straaten T, Tiller M, Li X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hygiene Toxicology, China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning
Province, PR China. xblu@mail.cmu.eud.cn

Analysis of gene expression can provide important information related to
prognostic or predictive factors in clinical work. Analysis of DNA or RNA
isolated from formalin fixed and paraffin-embedded tissue is generally accepted
to be difficult due to degradation and crosslinking. Factors affecting mRNA
quality such as formalin fixation length and autolysis period before
fixation/freezing have not been systematically addressed. In this study, we
analyzed the effect of formalin fixation length and autolysis period before
fixation/freezing on the expression of several reference genes in formalin-fixed 
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) colorectal carcinoma cells and tissue. We also used a
factorial experimental design to further analyze the interaction of both
variables. It was found that mRNA levels can be reproducibly quantified,
independent of the tested variables. Our findings confirm that clinical tumor
specimens removed by routine surgical procedures and combined with real-time
RT-PCR can be used for the analysis of gene expression in routine FFPE materials 
and provide some useful information related to the achieved tissues largely
stored in histopathology departments.

© 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcla.20451 
PMID: 21567463  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


152. EMBO J. 2011 May 10;30(12):2420-30. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.148.

Box C/D snoRNP catalysed methylation is aided by additional pre-rRNA
base-pairing.

van Nues RW(1), Granneman S, Kudla G, Sloan KE, Chicken M, Tollervey D, Watkins
NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cell and Molecular Biosciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle 
upon Tyne, UK.

2'-O-methylation of eukaryotic ribosomal RNA (r)RNA, essential for ribosome
function, is catalysed by box C/D small nucleolar (sno)RNPs. The RNA components
of these complexes (snoRNAs) contain one or two guide sequences, which, through
base-pairing, select the rRNA modification site. Adjacent to the guide sequences 
are protein-binding sites (the C/D or C'/D' motifs). Analysis of >2000 yeast box 
C/D snoRNAs identified additional conserved sequences in many snoRNAs that are
complementary to regions adjacent to the rRNA methylation site. This 'extra
base-pairing' was also found in many human box C/D snoRNAs and can stimulate
methylation by up to five-fold. Sequence analysis, combined with RNA-protein
crosslinking in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, identified highly divergent box C'/D'
motifs that are bound by snoRNP proteins. In vivo rRNA methylation assays showed 
these to be active. Our data suggest roles for non-catalytic subunits (Nop56 and 
Nop58) in rRNA binding and support an asymmetric model for box C/D snoRNP
organization. The study provides novel insights into the extent of the
snoRNA-rRNA interactions required for efficient methylation and the structural
organization of the snoRNPs.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2011.148 
PMCID: PMC3116282
PMID: 21556049  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


153. J Toxicol Sci. 2011 Apr;36(2):173-80.

Chromium (VI) inhibits mouse metallothionein-I gene transcription by modifying
the transcription potential of the co-activator p300.

Kimura T(1), Okumura F, Onodera A, Nakanishi T, Itoh N, Isobe M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Setsunan
University, Japan. tomoki@pharm.setsunan.ac.jp

The production of the heavy metal-binding proteins, the metallothioneins (MTs),
is induced by heavy metals such as Zn, Cd, and Hg. MTs maintain Zn homeostasis
and attenuate heavy metal-induced cytotoxicity by sequestering these metals and
lowering their intracellular concentrations. Previously, we had reported that Zn 
induced the formation of a co-activator complex containing metal response
element-binding transcription factor-1 (MTF-1) and the histone acetyltransferase 
(HAT), p300, which plays an essential role in the activation of MT-1
transcription. In addition, we had shown that Cr(VI) inhibits Zn-induced MT-1
transcription by preventing the Zn-dependent formation of the MTF-1-p300 complex.
In the current study, we have shown that the inhibition by Cr(VI) was partially
overcome by the overexpression of p300 or MTF-1 in an MT-I promoter-driven
luciferase reporter assay system and have used real-time RT-PCR to determine MT-I
mRNA levels. It has been reported that Cr(VI) inhibits CYP1A1 transcription by
crosslinking histone deacetylase (HDAC) to the promoter. The crosslink inhibits
the recruitment of p300 to the MT-1 promoter and blocks HAT-dependent
transactivation by p300. However, our results demonstrate that trichostatin A, an
HDAC inhibitor, could not block the inhibitory effects of Cr(VI) on MT-1
transcription and that there were no significant differences in the in vitro
inhibitory effects of Cr(VI), Cr(III), and Zn on p300 HAT activity. This suggests
that the inhibitory effects of Cr(VI) on MT-I transcription may be due to its
effects on the HAT-independent transactivation ability rather than the
HAT-dependent, HDAC release-related transactivation ability of p300.

DOI: 10.2131/jts.36.173 
PMID: 21467744  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


154. EMBO J. 2011 May 4;30(9):1790-803. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.97. Epub 2011 Apr 1.

The nuclear RNA polymerase II surveillance system targets polymerase III
transcripts.

Wlotzka W(1), Kudla G, Granneman S, Tollervey D.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh,
UK.

Erratum in
    EMBO J. 2011;30(14):2982.

A key question in nuclear RNA surveillance is how target RNAs are recognized. To 
address this, we identified in vivo binding sites for nuclear RNA surveillance
factors, Nrd1, Nab3 and the Trf4/5–Air1/2–Mtr4 polyadenylation (TRAMP) complex
poly(A) polymerase Trf4, by UV crosslinking. Hit clusters were reproducibly found
over known binding sites on small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs), pre-mRNAs and
cryptic, unstable non-protein-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) ('CUTs'), along with ~642
predicted long anti-sense ncRNAs (asRNAs), ~178 intergenic ncRNAs and,
surprisingly, ~1384 mRNAs. Five putative asRNAs tested were confirmed to exist
and were stabilized by loss of Nrd1, Nab3 or Trf4. Mapping of micro-deletions and
substitutions allowed clear definition of preferred, in vivo Nab3 and Nrd1
binding sites. Nrd1 and Nab3 were believed to be Pol II specific but,
unexpectedly, bound many oligoadenylated Pol III transcripts, predominately
pre-tRNAs. Depletion of Nrd1 or Nab3 stabilized tested Pol III transcripts and
their oligoadenylation was dependent on Nrd1–Nab3 and TRAMP. Surveillance targets
were enriched for non-encoded A-rich tails. These were generally very short (1–5 
nt), potentially explaining why adenylation destabilizes these RNAs while
stabilizing mRNAs with long poly(A) tails.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2011.97 
PMCID: PMC3102002
PMID: 21460797  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


155. PLoS One. 2011 Mar 24;6(3):e17728. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017728.

Effects of nickel treatment on H3K4 trimethylation and gene expression.

Tchou-Wong KM(1), Kiok K, Tang Z, Kluz T, Arita A, Smith PR, Brown S, Costa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Medicine, New York University School of Medicine, 
Tuxedo, New York, United States of America. tchouk02@nyumc.org

Occupational exposure to nickel compounds has been associated with lung and nasal
cancers. We have previously shown that exposure of the human lung adenocarcinoma 
A549 cells to NiCl(2) for 24 hr significantly increased global levels of
trimethylated H3K4 (H3K4me3), a transcriptional activating mark that maps to the 
promoters of transcribed genes. To further understand the potential epigenetic
mechanism(s) underlying nickel carcinogenesis, we performed genome-wide mapping
of H3K4me3 by chromatin immunoprecipitation and direct genome sequencing
(ChIP-seq) and correlated with transcriptome genome-wide mapping of RNA
transcripts by massive parallel sequencing of cDNA (RNA-seq). The effect of
NiCl(2) treatment on H3K4me3 peaks within 5,000 bp of transcription start sites
(TSSs) on a set of genes highly induced by nickel in both A549 cells and human
peripheral blood mononuclear cells were analyzed. Nickel exposure increased the
level of H3K4 trimethylation in both the promoters and coding regions of several 
genes including CA9 and NDRG1 that were increased in expression in A549 cells. We
have also compared the extent of the H3K4 trimethylation in the absence and
presence of formaldehyde crosslinking and observed that crosslinking of chromatin
was required to observe H3K4 trimethylation in the coding regions immediately
downstream of TSSs of some nickel-induced genes including ADM and IGFBP3. This is
the first genome-wide mapping of trimethylated H3K4 in the promoter and coding
regions of genes induced after exposure to NiCl(2). This study may provide
insights into the epigenetic mechanism(s) underlying the carcinogenicity of
nickel compounds.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017728 
PMCID: PMC3063782
PMID: 21455298  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Cancer Lett. 2011 Jun 1;305(1):86-93. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2011.02.030.

FANCD2 but not FANCA promotes cellular resistance to type II topoisomerase
poisons.

Kachnic LA(1), Li L, Fournier L, Ferraiolo N, Dahm-Daphi J, Borgmann K, Willers
H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular & Molecular Radiation Oncology, Department of Radiation
Oncology, Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Charlestown, MA 02129,
USA.

Genetic or epigenetic inactivation of the pathway formed by the Fanconi Anemia
(FA) and BRCA proteins occurs in several cancer types, including lung and breast 
cancer, rendering the affected tumors potentially hypersensitive to DNA
crosslinking agents. However, the cytotoxicity of other commonly used cancer
therapeutics in cells with FA/BRCA pathway defects remains to be defined.
Building on earlier data that implicated BRCA1 and BRCA2 in the repair of DNA
damage caused by the topoisomerase II poison etoposide, we studied the role of
FANCD2 in mediating resistance to several topoisomerase II poisons. We establish 
that the loss of FANCD2 increases cell death in response to etoposide. FANCD2
promotes homologous recombination repair (HRR) and prevents DNA double-strand
break formation and chromosomal aberrations in etoposide-treated cells.
Strikingly, this function of FANCD2 is independent of FANCD2 foci formation and
of FANCA, which is a member of the FA core complex upstream of FANCD2
mono-ubiquitination. Thus, FANCD2 appears to promote HRR in a
mono-ubiquitination-independent manner in conjunction with BRCA1/2. These data
add to an emerging body of evidence indicating that the FA pathway is not linear 
and that several protein subcomplexes with different functions exist. Our
findings are potentially relevant for predicting the sensitivity of lung and
breast cancers to etoposide and doxorubicin, respectively.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.canlet.2011.02.030 
PMID: 21414716  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Vis Exp. 2011 Feb 25;(48). pii: 2498. doi: 10.3791/2498.

Isolation of translating ribosomes containing peptidyl-tRNAs for functional and
structural analyses.

Shirole N(1), Balasubramanian S, Yanofsky C, Cruz-Vera L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alabama Huntsville, USA.

Recently, structural and biochemical studies have detailed many of the molecular 
events that occur in the ribosome during inhibition of protein synthesis by
antibiotics and during nascent polypeptide synthesis. Some of these antibiotics, 
and regulatory nascent polypeptides mostly in the form of peptidyl-tRNAs, inhibit
either peptide bond formation or translation termination. These inhibitory events
can stop the movement of the ribosome, a phenomenon termed "translational
arrest". Translation arrest induced by either an antibiotic or a nascent
polypeptide has been shown to regulate the expression of genes involved in
diverse cellular functions such as cell growth, antibiotic resistance, protein
translocation and cell metabolism. Knowledge of how antibiotics and regulatory
nascent polypeptides alter ribosome function is essential if we are to understand
the complete role of the ribosome in translation, in every organism. Here, we
describe a simple methodology that can be used to purify, exclusively, for
analysis, those ribosomes translating a specific mRNA and containing a specific
peptidyl-tRNA. This procedure is based on selective isolation of translating
ribosomes bound to a biotin-labeled mRNA. These translational complexes are
separated from other ribosomes in the same mixture, using streptavidin
paramagnetic beads (SMB) and a magnetic field (MF). Biotin-labeled mRNAs are
synthesized by run-off transcription assays using as templates PCR-generated DNA 
fragments that contain T7 transcriptional promoters. T7 RNA polymerase
incorporates biotin-16-UMP from biotin-UTP; under our conditions approximately
ten biotin-16-UMP molecules are incorporated in a 600 nt mRNA with a 25% UMP
content. These biotin-labeled mRNAs are then isolated, and used in in vitro
translation assays performed with release factor 2 (RF2)-depleted cell-free
extracts obtained from Escherichia coli strains containing wild type or mutant
ribosomes. Ribosomes translating the biotin-labeled mRNA sequences are stalled at
the stop codon region, due to the absence of the RF2 protein, which normally
accomplishes translation termination. Stalled ribosomes containing the newly
synthesized peptidyl-tRNA are isolated and removed from the translation reactions
using SMB and an MF. These beads only bind biotin-containing messages. The
isolated, translational complexes, can be used to analyze the structural and
functional features of wild type or mutant ribosomal components, or peptidyl-tRNA
sequences, as well as determining ribosome interaction with antibiotics or other 
molecular factors. To examine the function of these isolated ribosome complexes, 
peptidyl-transferase assays can be performed in the presence of the antibiotic
puromycin. To study structural changes in translational complexes, well
established procedures can be used, such as i) crosslinking to specific amino
acids and/or ii) alkylation protection assays.

DOI: 10.3791/2498 
PMCID: PMC3197406
PMID: 21403627  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Stem Cells. 2011 Mar;29(3):418-29. doi: 10.1002/stem.595.

Inhibition of ataxia telangiectasia- and Rad3-related function abrogates the in
vitro and in vivo tumorigenicity of human colon cancer cells through depletion of
the CD133(+) tumor-initiating cell fraction.

Gallmeier E(1), Hermann PC, Mueller MT, Machado JG, Ziesch A, De Toni EN, Palagyi
A, Eisen C, Ellwart JW, Rivera J, Rubio-Viqueira B, Hidalgo M, Bunz F, Göke B,
Heeschen C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine II, Campus Grosshadern, Ludwigs-Maximilian-University
of Munich, Munich, Germany.

The identification of novel approaches to specifically target the DNA-damage
checkpoint response in chemotherapy-resistant cancer stem cells (CSC) of solid
tumors has recently attracted great interest. We show here in colon cancer cell
lines and primary colon cancer cells that inhibition of checkpoint-modulating
phosphoinositide 3-kinase-related (PIK) kinases preferentially depletes the
chemoresistant and exclusively tumorigenic CD133(+) cell fraction. We observed a 
time- and dose-dependent disproportionally pronounced loss of CD133(+) cells and 
the consecutive lack of in vitro and in vivo tumorigenicity of the remaining
cells. Depletion of CD133(+) cells was initiated through apoptosis of cycling
CD133(+) cells and further substantiated through subsequent recruitment of
quiescent CD133(+) cells into the cell cycle followed by their elimination.
Models using specific PIK kinase inhibitors, somatic cell gene targeting, and RNA
interference demonstrated that the observed detrimental effects of caffeine on
CSC were attributable specifically to the inhibition of the PIK kinase ataxia
telangiectasia- and Rad3-related (ATR). Mechanistically, phosphorylation of CHK1 
checkpoint homolog (S. pombe; CHK1) was significantly enhanced in CD133(+) as
compared with CD133(-) cells on treatment with DNA interstrand-crosslinking (ICL)
agents, indicating a preferential activation of the ATR/CHK1-dependent DNA-damage
response in tumorigenic CD133(+) cells. Consistently, the chemoresistance of
CD133(+) cells toward DNA ICL agents was overcome through inhibition of
ATR/CHK1-signaling. In conclusion, our study illustrates a novel target to
eliminate the tumorigenic CD133(+) cell population in colon cancer and provides
another rationale for the development of specific ATR-inhibitors.

Copyright © 2011 AlphaMed Press.

DOI: 10.1002/stem.595 
PMID: 21308861  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


159. DNA Cell Biol. 2011 Jun;30(6):339-46. doi: 10.1089/dna.2010.1114. Epub 2011 Feb
6.

La protein can simultaneously bind to both 3'- and 5'-noncoding regions of
Japanese encephalitis virus genome.

Vashist S(1), Bhullar D, Vrati S.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Immunology, Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, JNU Complex, New Delhi,
India. vrati@nii.res.in

Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) genome is a single-stranded, positive-sense RNA
with noncoding regions (NCRs) of 95 and 585 bases at its 5' and 3' ends,
respectively. These may interact with viral or host proteins important for viral 
replication. We have previously shown that La protein binds the 3'-stem-loop (SL)
structure of JEV 3'-NCR. Using electrophoretic mobility shift and ultraviolet
crosslinking assays, we now show that La protein binds both 3'-SL and 5'-NCR of
JEV. La protein binding to 5'-NCR RNA was stable under high salt condition
(300 mM KCl) and the affinity of RNA protein interaction was high; the
dissociation constant (K(d)) for La binding with 5'-NCR RNA was 8.8 nM,
indicating the physiological relevance of the interaction. RNA toe-printing
assays showed that La protein interacted with nucleotides located in the top loop
of the predicted structure of 5'-NCR RNA. Using competitive binding studies and
5'-3' coprecipitation assay, we have demonstrated that La protein could
simultaneously bind both JEV 3'- and 5'-NCRs. This may help circularize the viral
genome for its efficient transcription and translation.

DOI: 10.1089/dna.2010.1114 
PMID: 21294637  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


160. J Vis Exp. 2010 Dec 20;(46). pii: 2264. doi: 10.3791/2264.

Profiling of methyltransferases and other S-adenosyl-L-homocysteine-binding
Proteins by Capture Compound Mass Spectrometry (CCMS).

Lenz T(1), Poot P, Gräbner O, Glinski M, Weinhold E, Dreger M, Köster H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry/Analytics, caprotec bioanalytics GmbH.

There is a variety of approaches to reduce the complexity of the proteome on the 
basis of functional small molecule-protein interactions such as affinity
chromatography (1) or Activity Based Protein Profiling (2). Trifunctional Capture
Compounds (CCs, Figure 1A) (3) are the basis for a generic approach, in which the
initial equilibrium-driven interaction between a small molecule probe (the
selectivity function, here S-adenosyl-(L)-homocysteine, SAH, Figure 1A) and
target proteins is irreversibly fixed upon photo-crosslinking between an
independent photo-activable reactivity function (here a phenylazide) of the CC
and the surface of the target proteins. The sorting function (here biotin) serves
to isolate the CC - protein conjugates from complex biological mixtures with the 
help of a solid phase (here streptavidin magnetic beads). Two configurations of
the experiments are possible: "off-bead" (4) or the presently described "on-bead"
configuration (Figure 1B). The selectivity function may be virtually any small
molecule of interest (substrates, inhibitors, drug molecules).
S-Adenosyl-(L)-methionine (SAM, Figure 1A) is probably, second to ATP, the most
widely used cofactor in nature (5, 6). It is used as the major methyl group donor
in all living organisms with the chemical reaction being catalyzed by
SAM-dependent methyltransferases (MTases), which methylate DNA (7), RNA (8),
proteins (9), or small molecules (10). Given the crucial role of methylation
reactions in diverse physiological scenarios (gene regulation, epigenetics,
metabolism), the profiling of MTases can be expected to become of similar
importance in functional proteomics as the profiling of kinases. Analytical tools
for their profiling, however, have not been available. We recently introduced a
CC with SAH as selectivity group to fill this technological gap (Figure 1A). SAH,
the product of SAM after methyl transfer, is a known general MTase product
inhibitor (11). For this reason and because the natural cofactor SAM is used by
further enzymes transferring other parts of the cofactor or initiating radical
reactions as well as because of its chemical instability (12), SAH is an ideal
selectivity function for a CC to target MTases. Here, we report the utility of
the SAH-CC and CCMS by profiling MTases and other SAH-binding proteins from the
strain DH5α of Escherichia coli (E. coli), one of the best-characterized
prokaryotes, which has served as the preferred model organism in countless
biochemical, biological, and biotechnological studies. Photo-activated
crosslinking enhances yield and sensitivity of the experiment, and the
specificity can be readily tested for in competition experiments using an excess 
of free SAH.

DOI: 10.3791/2264 
PMCID: PMC3159640
PMID: 21189471  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011 Mar;39(5):1868-79. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq1042. Epub 2010
Nov 9.

Analysis of in situ pre-mRNA targets of human splicing factor SF1 reveals a
function in alternative splicing.

Corioni M(1), Antih N, Tanackovic G, Zavolan M, Krämer A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Faculty of Sciences, University of Geneva, 30 quai
Ernest-Ansermet, CH-1211 Geneva.

The conserved pre-mRNA splicing factor SF1 is implicated in 3' splice site
recognition by binding directly to the intron branch site. However, because SF1
is not essential for constitutive splicing, its role in pre-mRNA processing has
remained mysterious. Here, we used crosslinking and immunoprecipitation (CLIP) to
analyze short RNAs directly bound by human SF1 in vivo. SF1 bound mainly
pre-mRNAs, with 77% of target sites in introns. Binding to target RNAs in vitro
was dependent on the newly defined SF1 binding motif ACUNAC, strongly resembling 
human branch sites. Surprisingly, the majority of SF1 binding sites did not map
to the expected position near 3' splice sites. Instead, target sites were
distributed throughout introns, and a smaller but significant fraction occurred
in exons within coding and untranslated regions. These data suggest a more
complex role for SF1 in splicing regulation. Indeed, SF1 silencing affected
alternative splicing of endogenous transcripts, establishing a previously
unexpected role for SF1 and branch site-like sequences in splice site selection.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkq1042 
PMCID: PMC3061054
PMID: 21062807  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Cell Cycle. 2010 Oct 1;9(19):3977-83. Epub 2010 Oct 1.

Human KIAA1018/FAN1 localizes to stalled replication forks via its
ubiquitin-binding domain.

Shereda RD(1), Machida Y, Machida YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology Research, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, MN, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2010 Nov 1;9(21):4259-60.
    Cell Cycle. 2010 Nov 1;9(21):4261-2.

Genome maintenance pathways correct aberrations in DNA that would be deleterious 
to the organism. A crucial element of many genome maintenance processes is the
ability to degrade DNA that either contains errors or obscures useful substrates 
for recombination and/or repair by means of nucleases. We have examined a
putative nuclease that has heretofore been unreported, KIAA1018/FAN1. This
protein contains a predicted ubiquitin-binding zinc finger domain (UBZ) near its 
N-terminus and an endonuclease-like fold near its C-terminus. Here we describe
that FAN1 is a nuclear protein and forms DNA-damage-induced foci, which appear to
be at stalled replication forks as denoted by RPA colocalization. Localization of
FAN1 to sites of damage is dependent upon its UBZ domain. In addition, knockdown 
of FAN1 by RNA interference leads to increased sensitivity to interstrand
crosslinking agents and accumulation of abnormal chromosomes. FAN1 may be an
important new player in the maintenance of genome stability.

DOI: 10.4161/cc.9.19.13207 
PMID: 20935496  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Clin Invest. 2010 Nov;120(11):3834-42. doi: 10.1172/JCI43391.

Cytokinesis failure occurs in Fanconi anemia pathway-deficient murine and human
bone marrow hematopoietic cells.

Vinciguerra P(1), Godinho SA, Parmar K, Pellman D, D'Andrea AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2011 Jan;121(1):27-30.

Fanconi anemia (FA) is a genomic instability disorder characterized by bone
marrow failure and cancer predisposition. FA is caused by mutations in any one of
several genes that encode proteins cooperating in a repair pathway and is
required for cellular resistance to DNA crosslinking agents. Recent studies
suggest that the FA pathway may also play a role in mitosis, since FANCD2 and
FANCI, the 2 key FA proteins, are localized to the extremities of ultrafine DNA
bridges (UFBs), which link sister chromatids during cell division. However,
whether FA proteins regulate cell division remains unclear. Here we have shown
that FA pathway-deficient cells display an increased number of UFBs compared with
FA pathway-proficient cells. The UFBs were coated by BLM (the RecQ helicase
mutated in Bloom syndrome) in early mitosis. In contrast, the FA protein FANCM
was recruited to the UFBs at a later stage. The increased number of bridges in FA
pathway-deficient cells correlated with a higher rate of cytokinesis failure
resulting in binucleated cells. Binucleated cells were also detectable in primary
murine FA pathway-deficient hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) and bone marrow
stromal cells from human patients with FA. Based on these observations, we
suggest that cytokinesis failure followed by apoptosis may contribute to bone
marrow failure in patients with FA.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI43391 
PMCID: PMC2964984
PMID: 20921626  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011 Jan;39(1):132-45. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq738. Epub 2010 Sep 
2.

The splicing-factor related protein SFPQ/PSF interacts with RAD51D and is
necessary for homology-directed repair and sister chromatid cohesion.

Rajesh C(1), Baker DK, Pierce AJ, Pittman DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical and Biomedical Sciences, South Carolina College
of Pharmacy, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 29208, USA.

DNA double-stranded breaks (DSBs) are among the most severe forms of DNA damage
and responsible for chromosomal translocations that may lead to gene fusions. The
RAD51 family plays an integral role in preserving genome stability by homology
directed repair of DSBs. From a proteomics screen, we recently identified
SFPQ/PSF as an interacting partner with the RAD51 paralogs, RAD51D, RAD51C and
XRCC2. Initially discovered as a potential RNA splicing factor, SFPQ was later
shown to have homologous recombination and non-homologous end joining related
activities and also to bind and modulate the function of RAD51. Here, we
demonstrate that SFPQ interacts directly with RAD51D and that deficiency of both 
proteins confers a severe loss of cell viability, indicating a synthetic lethal
relationship. Surprisingly, deficiency of SFPQ alone also leads to sister
chromatid cohesion defects and chromosome instability. In addition, SFPQ was
demonstrated to mediate homology directed DNA repair and DNA damage response
resulting from DNA crosslinking agents, alkylating agents and camptothecin. Taken
together, these data indicate that SFPQ association with the RAD51 protein
complex is essential for homologous recombination repair of DNA damage and
maintaining genome integrity.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkq738 
PMCID: PMC3017596
PMID: 20813759  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Eur J Immunol. 2010 Oct;40(10):2692-8. doi: 10.1002/eji.200940184.

FcγRIIB regulation of BCR/TLR-dependent autoreactive B-cell responses.

Avalos AM(1), Uccellini MB, Lenert P, Viglianti GA, Marshak-Rothstein A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA
01655, USA. Ann.Rothstein@umassmed.edu

Crosslinking of Fc γ receptor II B (FcγRIIB) and the BCR by immune complexes (IC)
can downregulate antigen-specific B-cell responses. Accordingly, FcγRIIB
deficiencies have been associated with B-cell hyperactivity in patients with
systemic lupus erythematosus and mouse models of lupus. However, we have
previously shown that murine IgG2a-autoreactive AM14 B cells respond robustly to 
chromatin-associated IC through a mechanism dependent on both the BCR and the
endosomal TLR9, despite FcγRIIB coexpression. To further evaluate the potential
contribution of FcγRIIB to the regulation of autoreactive B cells, we have now
compared the IC-triggered responses of FcγRIIB-deficient and FcγRIIB-sufficient
AM14 B cells. We find that FcγRIIB-deficient cells respond significantly better
than FcγRIIB-sufficient cells when stimulated with DNA IC that incorporate
low-affinity TLR9 ligand (CG-poor dsDNA fragments). AM14 B cells also respond to 
RNA-associated IC through BCR/TLR7 coengagement, but such BCR/TLR7-dependent
responses are normally highly dependent on IFN-α costimulation. However, we now
show that AM14 FcγRIIB(-/-) B cells are very effectively activated by RNA IC
without supplemental IFN-α priming. These results demonstrate that FcγRIIB can
effectively modulate both BCR/TLR9 and BCR/TLR7 endosomal-dependent activation of
autoreactive B cells.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.200940184 
PMCID: PMC3060940
PMID: 20809520  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Mol Cancer. 2010 May 28;9:127. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-127.

Genetic inactivation of the Fanconi anemia gene FANCC identified in the
hepatocellular carcinoma cell line HuH-7 confers sensitivity towards
DNA-interstrand crosslinking agents.

Palagyi A(1), Neveling K, Plinninger U, Ziesch A, Targosz BS, Denk GU, Ochs S,
Rizzani A, Meier D, Thasler WE, Hanenberg H, De Toni EN, Bassermann F, Schäfer C,
Göke B, Schindler D, Gallmeier E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine II, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Campus Grosshadern, 
Marchioninistrasse 15, 81377 Munich, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Inactivation of the Fanconi anemia (FA) pathway through defects in
one of 13 FA genes occurs at low frequency in various solid cancer entities among
the general population. As FA pathway inactivation confers a distinct
hypersensitivity towards DNA interstrand-crosslinking (ICL)-agents, FA defects
represent rational targets for individualized therapeutic strategies. Except for 
pancreatic cancer, however, the prevalence of FA defects in gastrointestinal (GI)
tumors has not yet been systematically explored.
RESULTS: A panel of GI cancer cell lines was screened for FA pathway inactivation
applying FANCD2 monoubiquitination and FANCD2/RAD51 nuclear focus formation and a
newly identified FA pathway-deficient cell line was functionally characterized.
The hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) line HuH-7 was defective in FANCD2
monoubiquitination and FANCD2 nuclear focus formation but proficient in RAD51
focus formation. Gene complementation studies revealed that this proximal FA
pathway inactivation was attributable to defective FANCC function in HuH-7 cells.
Accordingly, a homozygous inactivating FANCC nonsense mutation (c.553C > T,
p.R185X) was identified in HuH-7, resulting in partial transcriptional skipping
of exon 6 and leading to the classic cellular FA hypersensitivity phenotype;
HuH-7 cells exhibited a strongly reduced proliferation rate and a pronounced G2
cell cycle arrest at distinctly lower concentrations of ICL-agents than a panel
of non-isogenic, FA pathway-proficient HCC cell lines. Upon retroviral
transduction of HuH-7 cells with FANCC cDNA, FA pathway functions were restored
and ICL-hypersensitivity abrogated. Analyses of 18 surgical HCC specimens yielded
no further examples for genetic or epigenetic inactivation of FANCC, FANCF, or
FANCG in HCC, suggesting a low prevalence of proximal FA pathway inactivation in 
this tumor type.
CONCLUSIONS: As the majority of HCC are chemoresistant, assessment of FA pathway 
function in HCC could identify small subpopulations of patients expected to
predictably benefit from individualized treatment protocols using ICL-agents.

DOI: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-127 
PMCID: PMC2890608
PMID: 20509860  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


167. ISME J. 2010 Oct;4(10):1352-6. doi: 10.1038/ismej.2010.73. Epub 2010 May 27.

Fixation-free fluorescence in situ hybridization for targeted enrichment of
microbial populations.

Yilmaz S(1), Haroon MF, Rabkin BA, Tyson GW, Hugenholtz P.

Author information: 
(1)Microbial Ecology Program, DOE Joint Genome Institute, Walnut Creek, CA, USA.

We modified the standard ribosomal RNA-targeted fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) protocol by removing the fixation steps to allow recovery of
unmodified nucleic acids. Using this method, hybridized cells could be visualized
in two bioreactor sludges and termite hindgut samples by epifluorescence
microscopy. We then targeted one bacterial and one archaeal population in the
sludge samples with group-specific oligonucleotide probes using in-solution
fixation-free FISH and sorted hybridized populations using fluorescence-activated
cell sorting (FACS). We could show that sorted populations were highly enriched
for the target organisms based on 16S rRNA gene sequencing, thus confirming probe
specificity using the modified FISH protocol. This approach should facilitate
subsequent genomic sequencing and analysis of targeted populations as DNA is not 
compromised by crosslinking during fixation.

DOI: 10.1038/ismej.2010.73 
PMID: 20505753  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Nucleosides Nucleotides Nucleic Acids. 2009 Nov;28(11):1076-94. doi:
10.1080/15257770903368385.

Synthesis of guanosine and deoxyguanosine phosphoramidites with cross-linkable
thioalkyl tethers for direct incorporation into RNA and DNA.

Hou X(1), Wang G, Gaffney BL, Jones RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Rutgers, The State University of
New Jersey, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854, USA.

We describe the synthesis of protected phosphoramidites of deoxyriboguanosine and
guanosine derivatives containing a thiopropyl tether at the guanine N2 (7a,b) for
site-specific crosslinking from the minor groove of either DNA or RNA to a thiol 
of a protein or another nucleic acid. The thiol is initially protected as a
tert-butyl disulfide that is stable during oligonucleotide synthesis. While the
completed oligonucleotide is still attached to the support, or after
purification, the tert-butyl thiol can readily be removed or replaced by
thioethylamine or 5-thio-2-nitrobenzoic acid, which have more favorable
crosslinking rates.

DOI: 10.1080/15257770903368385 
PMCID: PMC2829721
PMID: 20183575  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Mol Biol. 2010 Jan 15;395(2):234-41. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2009.11.028. Epub 2009 
Nov 13.

Local rather than global folding enables the lead-dependent activity of the 8-17 
deoxyribozyme: evidence from contact photo-crosslinking.

Liu Y(1), Sen D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology & Biochemistry, Simon Fraser University,
Burnaby, British Columbia, Canada V5A 1S6.

The 8-17 deoxyribozyme is an in vitro selected enzyme capable of
sequence-specific cleavage of RNA. While selected to be a magnesium and
zinc-utilizing enzyme, the 8-17 DNAzyme has been shown to utilize lead for its
catalysis. Fluorescence-based experiments have indicated that the magnesium- and 
zinc-utilizing versions of the DNAzyme-substrate complex need to form a defined
tertiary structure to be active, but no such global folding is required for the
lead-mediated activity. Here, we have investigated this phenomenon, including the
use of contact photo-crosslinking to map the tertiary fold of the lead-dependent 
DNAzyme. While our results recapitulate that global folding is not required for
the lead activity, they reveal strikingly distinct lead-mediated modes of
activity under conditions of low versus moderate solution ionic strength. Even in
very low salt buffers, where no global folding of the 8-17 DNAzyme occurs, the
active site of the enzyme appears to form a distinct local fold, one that cannot 
be modelled easily by DNA/RNA constructs that preserve key sequence and secondary
structure features of the active site.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2009.11.028 
PMID: 19917290  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2009;125(3):165-75. doi: 10.1159/000230001. Epub 2009 Sep
4.

Topo IIIalpha and BLM act within the Fanconi anemia pathway in response to
DNA-crosslinking agents.

Hemphill AW(1), Akkari Y, Newell AH, Schultz RA, Grompe M, North PS, Hickson ID, 
Jakobs PM, Rennie S, Pauw D, Hejna J, Olson SB, Moses RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Medical Genetics, Oregon Health & Science
University, Portland, OR 97239-3098, USA.

The Bloom protein (BLM) and Topoisomerase IIIalpha are found in association with 
proteins of the Fanconi anemia (FA) pathway, a disorder manifesting increased
cellular sensitivity to DNA crosslinking agents. In order to determine if the
association reflects a functional interaction for the maintenance of genome
stability, we have analyzed the effects of siRNA-mediated depletion of the
proteins in human cells. Depletion of Topoisomerase IIIalpha or BLM leads to
increased radial formation, as is seen in FA. BLM and Topoisomerase IIIalpha are 
epistatic to the FA pathway for suppression of radial formation in response to
DNA interstrand crosslinks since depletion of either of them in FA cells does not
increase radial formation. Depletion of Topoisomerase IIIalpha or BLM also causes
an increase in sister chromatid exchanges, as is seen in Bloom syndrome cells.
Human Fanconi anemia cells, however, do not demonstrate increased sister
chromatid exchanges, separating this response from radial formation. Primary cell
lines from mice defective in both Blm and Fancd2 have the same interstrand
crosslink-induced genome instability as cells from mice deficient in the Fancd2
protein alone. These observations demonstrate that the association of BLM and
Topoisomerase IIIalpha with Fanconi proteins is a functional one, delineating a
BLM-Topoisomerase IIIalpha-Fanconi pathway that is critical for suppression of
chromosome radial formation.

Copyright 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000230001 
PMCID: PMC2759320
PMID: 19738377  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J Chromatogr A. 2009 Oct 9;1216(41):6881-9. doi: 10.1016/j.chroma.2009.08.044.
Epub 2009 Aug 21.

Methods for proteomic analysis of transcription factors.

Jiang D(1), Jarrett HW, Haskins WE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX
78249, USA.

Investigation of the transcription factor (TF) proteome presents challenges
including the large number of low abundance and post-translationally modified
proteins involved. Specialized purification and analysis methods have been
developed over the last decades which facilitate the study of the TF proteome and
these are reviewed here. Generally applicable proteomics methods that have been
successfully applied are also discussed. TFs are selectively purified by affinity
techniques using the DNA response element (RE) as the basis for highly specific
binding, and several agents have been discovered that either enhance binding or
diminish non-specific binding. One such affinity method called "trapping" enables
purification of TFs bound to nM concentrations and recovery of TF complexes in a 
highly purified state. The electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) is the
most important assay of TFs because it provides both measures of the affinity and
amount of the TF present. Southwestern (SW) blotting and DNA-protein crosslinking
(DPC) allow in vitro estimates of DNA-binding-protein mass, while chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) allows confirmation of promoter binding in vivo.
Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis methods (2-DE), and 3-DE methods which
combines EMSA with 2-DE, allow further resolution of TFs. The synergy of highly
selective purification and analytical strategies has led to an explosion of
knowledge about the TF proteome and the proteomes of other DNA- and RNA-binding
proteins.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chroma.2009.08.044 
PMCID: PMC2778203
PMID: 19726046  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


172. BMC Cancer. 2009 Aug 27;9:301. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-9-301.

A mammalianized synthetic nitroreductase gene for high-level expression.

Grohmann M(1), Paulmann N, Fleischhauer S, Vowinckel J, Priller J, Walther DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Molecular Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Molecular
Genetics, Berlin, Germany. grohmann@molgen.mpg.de

BACKGROUND: The nitroreductase/5-(azaridin-1-yl)-2,4-dinitrobenzamide
(NTR/CB1954) enzyme/prodrug system is considered as a promising candidate for
anti-cancer strategies by gene-directed enzyme prodrug therapy (GDEPT) and has
recently entered clinical trials. It requires the genetic modification of tumor
cells to express the E. coli enzyme nitroreductase that bioactivates the prodrug 
CB1954 to a powerful cytotoxin. This metabolite causes apoptotic cell death by
DNA interstrand crosslinking. Enhancing the enzymatic NTR activity for CB1954
should improve the therapeutical potential of this enzyme-prodrug combination in 
cancer gene therapy.
METHODS: We performed de novo synthesis of the bacterial nitroreductase gene
adapting codon usage to mammalian preferences. The synthetic gene was
investigated for its expression efficacy and ability to sensitize mammalian cells
to CB1954 using western blotting analysis and cytotoxicity assays.
RESULTS: In our study, we detected cytoplasmic protein aggregates by expressing
GFP-tagged NTR in COS-7 cells, suggesting an impaired translation by divergent
codon usage between prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Therefore, we generated a
synthetic variant of the nitroreductase gene, called ntro, adapted for high-level
expression in mammalian cells. A total of 144 silent base substitutions were made
within the bacterial ntr gene to change its codon usage to mammalian preferences.
The codon-optimized ntro either tagged to gfp or c-myc showed higher expression
levels in mammalian cell lines. Furthermore, the ntro rendered several cell lines
ten times more sensitive to the prodrug CB1954 and also resulted in an improved
bystander effect.
CONCLUSION: Our results show that codon optimization overcomes expression
limitations of the bacterial ntr gene in mammalian cells, thereby improving the
NTR/CB1954 system at translational level for cancer gene therapy in humans.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2407-9-301 
PMCID: PMC3087338
PMID: 19712451  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Protein Sci. 2009 Nov;18(11):2209-18. doi: 10.1002/pro.225.

Elucidation of the stability and functional regions of the human coronavirus OC43
nucleocapsid protein.

Huang CY(1), Hsu YL, Chiang WL, Hou MH.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Center, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung 402, Taiwan.

Human coronavirus OC43 (HCoV-OC43) is one of the causes of the "common cold" in
human during seasons of cold weather. The primary function of the HCoV-OC43
nucleocapsid protein (N protein) is to recognize viral genomic RNA, which leads
to ribonucleocapsid formation. Here, we characterized the stability and
identified the functional regions of the recombinant HCoV-OC43 N protein.
Circular dichroism and fluorescence measurements revealed that the HCoV-OC43 N
protein is more highly ordered and stabler than the SARS-CoV N protein previously
studied. Surface plasmon resonance (SPR) experiments showed that the affinity of 
HCoV-OC43 N protein for RNA was approximately fivefold higher than that of N
protein for DNA. Moreover, we found that the HCoV-OC43 N protein contains three
RNA-binding regions in its N-terminal region (residues 1-173) and central-linker 
region (residues 174-232 and 233-300). The binding affinities of the truncated N 
proteins and RNA follow the order: residues 1-173-residues 233-300 > residues
174-232. SPR experiments demonstrated that the C-terminal region (residues
301-448) of HCoV-OC43 N protein lacks RNA-binding activity, while crosslinking
and gel filtration analyses revealed that the C-terminal region is mainly
involved in the oligomerization of the HCoV-OC43 N protein. This study may
benefit the understanding of the mechanism of HCoV-OC43 nucleocapsid formation.

DOI: 10.1002/pro.225 
PMCID: PMC2788276
PMID: 19691129  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2009 Sep 1;19(17):5222-4. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2009.07.011. 
Epub 2009 Jul 9.

Protein-DNA photo-crosslinking with a genetically encoded benzophenone-containing
amino acid.

Lee HS(1), Dimla RD, Schultz PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and the Skaggs Institute for Chemical Biology, The
Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037,
USA.

The photo-crosslinking amino acid, p-benzoyl-L-phenylalanine (pBpa), was
genetically incorporated into Escherichia coli catabolite activator protein (CAP)
in bacteria in response to an amber nonsense codon using an orthogonal
tRNA/aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase pair. The mutant CAP (CAP-K26Bpa) containing pBpa 
formed a covalent complex with a DNA fragment containing the consensus operator
sequence upon UV irradiation. Because this amino acid can be genetically
incorporated into any DNA-binding protein in E. coli, yeast or mammalian cells
with minimal perturbation of protein structure, this method should be generally
useful for investigating DNA-protein interactions.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2009.07.011 
PMCID: PMC2873854
PMID: 19643606  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Biomaterials. 2009 Oct;30(28):5187-200. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2009.06.001. 
Epub 2009 Jun 27.

In-situ crosslinking hydrogels for combinatorial delivery of chemokines and
siRNA-DNA carrying microparticles to dendritic cells.

Singh A(1), Suri S, Roy K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin,
Austin, TX 78712, USA.

Erratum in
    Biomaterials. 2010 Feb;31(6):1460.

Polymer-based, injectable systems that can simultaneously deliver multiple
bioactive agents in a controlled manner could significantly enhance the efficacy 
of next generation therapeutics. For immunotherapies to be effective, both
prophylactically or therapeutically, it is not only critical to drive the antigen
(Ag)-specific immune response strongly towards either T helper type 1 (Th1) or
Th2 phenotype, but also to promote recruitment of a high number of
antigen-presenting cells (APCs) at the site of immunization. We have recently
reported a microparticle-based system capable of simultaneously delivering siRNA 
and DNA to APCs. Here we present an in-situ crosslinkable, injectable formulation
containing dendritic cell (DC)-chemo-attractants and dual-mode DNA-siRNA loaded
microparticles to attract immature DCs and simultaneously deliver, to the
migrated cells, immunomodulatory siRNA and plasmid DNA antigens. These low
crosslink density hydrogels were designed to degrade within 2-7 days in vitro and
released chemokines in a sustained manner. Chemokine carrying gels attracted 4-6 
folds more DCs over a sustained period in vitro, compared to an equivalent bolus 
dose. Interestingly, migrated DCs were able to infiltrate the hydrogels and
efficiently phagocytose the siRNA-DNA carrying microparticles. Hydrogel embedded 
microparticles co-delivering Interleukin-10 siRNA and plasmid DNA antigens
exhibited efficient Interleukin-10 gene knockdown in migrated primary DCs in
vitro.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2009.06.001 
PMCID: PMC2818033
PMID: 19560815  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Int J Pharm. 2009 Jun 5;374(1-2):125-38. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2009.03.009. Epub
2009 Mar 19.

Effect of homobifunctional crosslinkers on nucleic acids delivery ability of PEI 
nanoparticles.

Swami A(1), Goyal R, Tripathi SK, Singh N, Katiyar N, Mishra AK, Gupta KC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology, Delhi University Campus, Mall
Road, Delhi, India.

Polyethylenimine (PEI), a widely used cationic polymeric vector with high
transfection efficiency, was converted into nanoparticles by introducing ionic
and covalent crosslinkers with varying proportion of 1,6-hexanebisphosphate (HP),
adipic acid (AA) and 1,4-butane dialdehyde (BA) to obtain a small library of
HP-PEI (HPP), AA-PEI (AAP) and BA-PEI (BAP) nanoparticles, respectively.
Particles were characterized by spectroscopic technique as well as
physicochemical parameters such as size, morphology, surface charge, effect of
crosslinking on buffering capacity and DNA binding ability. The entire series of 
nanoparticles were compared for their cytoxicity and ability to deliver genes in 
various cell lines. Among various nanoparticles, AAP-3 nanoparticle/DNA complex
exhibited higher transfection efficiency (1.5-7.8 folds) than the native PEI
(25kDa) and commercially available transfection reagents, such as GenePorter,
GenePorter2, Fugene and Superfect, with cell viability >85%. The highest cell
viability was observed with BAP nanoparticles (>95%). Importantly, the
transfection activity of nanoparticle/DNA complexes was preserved in the presence
of serum. Transfection with GFP-siRNA inhibited expression of transfected GFP
gene by approximately 81-92%. All nanoparticle types (HPP, AAP and BAP) required 
a comparable time for entry into cells and subsequent intracellular passage from 
the cytoplasm to the nucleus. Intravenous delivery of (99)Tc labeled BAP-2/DNA
complex to female Balb/c mice revealed the presence of the complex in most of the
organs with the highest retention in liver. In conclusion, HPP, AAP and BAP
nanoparticles are safe for efficient gene delivery.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2009.03.009 
PMID: 19446769  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Chembiochem. 2009 Jun 15;10(9):1507-18. doi: 10.1002/cbic.200900029.

A targeted releasable affinity probe (TRAP) for in vivo photocrosslinking.

Yan P(1), Wang T, Newton GJ, Knyushko TV, Xiong Y, Bigelow DJ, Squier TC, Mayer
MU.

Author information: 
(1)Novozymes, Inc., 1445 Drew Ave, Davis, CA 95618, USA.

Protein crosslinking, especially coupled to mass-spectrometric identification, is
increasingly used to determine protein binding partners and protein-protein
interfaces for isolated protein complexes. The modification of crosslinkers to
permit their targeted use in living cells is of considerable importance for
studying protein-interaction networks, which are commonly modulated through weak 
interactions that are formed transiently to permit rapid cellular response to
environmental changes. We have therefore synthesized a targeted and releasable
affinity probe (TRAP) consisting of a biarsenical fluorescein linked to
benzophenone that binds to a tetracysteine sequence in a protein engineered for
specific labeling. Here, the utility of TRAP for capturing protein binding
partners upon photoactivation of the benzophenone moiety has been demonstrated in
living bacteria and mammalian cells. In addition, ligand exchange of the
arsenic-sulfur bonds between TRAP and the tetracysteine sequence to added
dithiols results in fluorophore transfer to the crosslinked binding partner. In
isolated protein complexes, this release from the original binding site permits
the identification of the proximal binding interface through mass spectrometric
fragmentation and computational sequence identification.

DOI: 10.1002/cbic.200900029 
PMID: 19441027  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Methods. 2009 Aug;48(4):368-74. doi: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2009.02.020. Epub 2009 Mar
9.

Detecting transcriptionally engaged RNA polymerase in eukaryotic cells with
permanganate genomic footprinting.

Gilmour DS(1), Fan R.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Eukaryotic Gene Regulation, Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State University, 208 Althouse, University
Park, PA 16802, United States. dsg11@psu.edu

Analysis of the distribution of RNA polymerase II on the genomes of Drosophila
and human cells using in vivo protein-DNA crosslinking reveals that RNA
polymerase II (Pol II) is concentrated at the 5'-ends of thousands of genes. This
appears to be irrespective of transcription levels. Hence, a potential regulatory
step in the transcription of many genes occurs after Pol II has associated with
the promoter. The protein-DNA crosslinking technique widely used to monitor Pol
II and other proteins on chromosomes in vivo, however, does not reveal if Pol II 
is transcriptionally engaged on DNA. Genomic footprinting with potassium
permanganate provides one method for detecting transcriptionally engaged Pol II. 
Using this approach, we have determined that the Pol II associated with the
promoters of many genes has initiated transcription but paused in the region
20-50 nucleotides from the start. Here we describe the application of this method
in Drosophila and human cells. The method should prove useful in assessing if
promoter bound Pol II has engaged in transcription and for investigating the
establishment and regulation of transcriptionally engaged Pol II.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2009.02.020 
PMID: 19272453  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


179. PLoS Pathog. 2009 Mar;5(3):e1000330. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000330. Epub 2009
Mar 6.

RNA-dependent oligomerization of APOBEC3G is required for restriction of HIV-1.

Huthoff H(1), Autore F, Gallois-Montbrun S, Fraternali F, Malim MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, King's College London, London, United
Kingdom.

The human cytidine deaminase APOBEC3G (A3G) is a potent inhibitor of retroviruses
and transposable elements and is able to deaminate cytidines to uridines in
single-stranded DNA replication intermediates. A3G contains two canonical
cytidine deaminase domains (CDAs), of which only the C-terminal one is known to
mediate cytidine deamination. By exploiting the crystal structure of the related 
tetrameric APOBEC2 (A2) protein, we identified residues within A3G that have the 
potential to mediate oligomerization of the protein. Using yeast two-hybrid
assays, co-immunoprecipitation, and chemical crosslinking, we show that
tyrosine-124 and tryptophan-127 within the enzymatically inactive N-terminal CDA 
domain mediate A3G oligomerization, and this coincides with packaging into HIV-1 
virions. In addition to the importance of specific residues in A3G,
oligomerization is also shown to be RNA-dependent. Homology modelling of A3G onto
the A2 template structure indicates an accumulation of positive charge in a
pocket formed by a putative dimer interface. Substitution of arginine residues at
positions 24, 30, and 136 within this pocket resulted in reduced virus
inhibition, virion packaging, and oligomerization. Consistent with RNA serving a 
central role in all these activities, the oligomerization-deficient A3G proteins 
associated less efficiently with several cellular RNA molecules. Accordingly, we 
propose that occupation of the positively charged pocket by RNA promotes A3G
oligomerization, packaging into virions and antiviral function.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000330 
PMCID: PMC2646141
PMID: 19266078  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 Mar;37(4):1073-85. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn1051. Epub 2009
Jan 7.

A ChIP-chip approach reveals a novel role for transcription factor IRF1 in the
DNA damage response.

Frontini M(1), Vijayakumar M, Garvin A, Clarke N.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Clinical Sciences Centre, Faculty of Medicine Imperial College London,
Hammersmith Hospital Campus, Du Cane Road, London, W12 0NN, UK.

IRF1 is a transcription factor that regulates key processes in the immune system 
and in tumour suppression. To gain further insight into IRF1's role in these
processes, we searched for new target genes by performing chromatin
immunoprecipitation coupled to a CpG island microarray (ChIP-chip). Using this
approach we identified 202 new IRF1-binding sites with high confidence.
Functional categorization of the target genes revealed a surprising cadre of new 
roles that can be linked to IRF1. One of the major functional categories was the 
DNA damage response pathway. In order to further validate our findings, we show
that IRF1 can regulate the mRNA expression of a number of the DNA damage response
genes in our list. In particular, we demonstrate that the mRNA and protein levels
of the DNA repair protein BRIP1 [Fanconi anemia gene J (FANC J)] are upregulated 
after IRF1 over-expression. We also demonstrate that knockdown of IRF1 by siRNA
results in loss of BRIP1 expression, abrogation of BRIP1 foci after DNA
interstrand crosslink (ICL) damage and hypersensitivity to the DNA crosslinking
agent, melphalan; a characteristic phenotype of FANC J cells. Taken together, our
data provides a more complete understanding of the regulatory networks controlled
by IRF1 and reveals a novel role for IRF1 in regulating the ICL DNA damage
response.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkn1051 
PMCID: PMC2651779
PMID: 19129219  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


181. PLoS Genet. 2008 Dec;4(12):e1000302. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000302. Epub 2008
Dec 12.

The chromosomal high-affinity binding sites for the Drosophila dosage
compensation complex.

Straub T(1), Grimaud C, Gilfillan GD, Mitterweger A, Becker PB.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Unit and Centre for Integrated Protein Science (CiPSM),
Adolf-Butenandt Institute, Ludwig-Maximilians University, Munich, Germany.

Dosage compensation in male Drosophila relies on the X chromosome-specific
recruitment of a chromatin-modifying machinery, the dosage compensation complex
(DCC). The principles that assure selective targeting of the DCC are unknown.
According to a prevalent model, X chromosome targeting is initiated by
recruitment of the DCC core components, MSL1 and MSL2, to a limited number of
so-called "high-affinity sites" (HAS). Only very few such sites are known at the 
DNA sequence level, which has precluded the definition of DCC targeting
principles. Combining RNA interference against DCC subunits, limited
crosslinking, and chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled to probing
high-resolution DNA microarrays, we identified a set of 131 HAS for MSL1 and MSL2
and confirmed their properties by various means. The HAS sites are distributed
all over the X chromosome and are functionally important, since the extent of
dosage compensation of a given gene and its proximity to a HAS are positively
correlated. The sites are mainly located on non-coding parts of genes and
predominantly map to regions that are devoid of nucleosomes. In contrast, the
bulk of DCC binding is in coding regions and is marked by histone H3K36
methylation. Within the HAS, repetitive DNA sequences mainly based on GA and CA
dinucleotides are enriched. Interestingly, DCC subcomplexes bind a small number
of autosomal locations with similar features.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000302 
PMCID: PMC2586088
PMID: 19079572  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.


182. Mol Cell. 2008 Nov 7;32(3):337-46. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2008.09.015.

Organization of an activator-bound RNA polymerase holoenzyme.

Bose D(1), Pape T, Burrows PC, Rappas M, Wigneshweraraj SR, Buck M, Zhang X.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biosciences, Centre for Structural Biology, Department
of Life Sciences, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Imperial College London, London
SW7 2AZ, UK.

Transcription initiation involves the conversion from closed promoter complexes, 
comprising RNA polymerase (RNAP) and double-stranded promoter DNA, to open
complexes, in which the enzyme is able to access the DNA template in a
single-stranded form. The complex between bacterial RNAP and its major variant
sigma factor sigma(54) remains as a closed complex until ATP hydrolysis-dependent
remodeling by activator proteins occurs. This remodeling facilitates DNA melting 
and allows the transition to the open complex. Here we present cryoelectron
microscopy reconstructions of bacterial RNAP in complex with sigma(54) alone, and
of RNAP-sigma(54) with an AAA+ activator. Together with photo-crosslinking data
that establish the location of promoter DNA within the complexes, we explain why 
the RNAP-sigma(54) closed complex is unable to access the DNA template and
propose how the structural changes induced by activator binding can initiate
conformational changes that ultimately result in formation of the open complex.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2008.09.015 
PMCID: PMC2680985
PMID: 18995832  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Methods Mol Biol. 2008;488:167-80. doi: 10.1007/978-1-60327-475-3_11.

T7 RNA polymerase-mediated incorporation of 8-N(3)AMP into RNA for studying
protein-RNA interactions.

Gaur RK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope, Duarte, California, USA.

Ultraviolet (UV)-dependent photochemical crosslinking is a powerful approach that
can be used for the identification of RNA-protein interactions. Although
8-azidoATP (8-N(3)ATP) has been widely used to elucidate the ATP binding site of 
a variety of proteins, its inability to serve as an efficient substrate for
bacteriophage RNA polymerases apparently restricted its actual potential as a
photocrosslinking agent. In this chapter, in vitro transcription conditions that 
allow for template-dependent incorporation of 8-N(3)AMP into RNA are described.
In addition, it is shown that a high-affinity MS2 coat protein binding sequence, 
in which adenosine residues were replaced by 8-azidoadenosine, crosslinks to the 
coat protein of the Escherichia coli phage MS2. This approach can be extended to 
identify almost any RNA binding protein.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-60327-475-3_11 
PMID: 18982290  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Chem Biol. 2008 Oct 20;15(10):1091-103. doi: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2008.09.008.

A full-length group 1 bacterial sigma factor adopts a compact structure
incompatible with DNA binding.

Schwartz EC(1), Shekhtman A, Dutta K, Pratt MR, Cowburn D, Darst S, Muir TW.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Synthetic Protein Chemistry, The Rockefeller University, 1230
York Avenue, New York, NY 10021, USA.

The sigma factors are the key regulators of bacterial transcription initiation.
Through direct read-out of promoter DNA sequence, they recruit the core RNA
polymerase to sites of initiation, thereby dictating the RNA polymerase
promoter-specificity. The group 1 sigma factors, which direct the vast majority
of transcription initiation during log phase growth and are essential for
viability, are autoregulated by an N-terminal sequence known as sigma1.1. We
report the solution structure of Thermotoga maritima sigmaA sigma1.1. We
additionally demonstrate by using chemical crosslinking strategies that sigma1.1 
is in close proximity to the promoter recognition domains of sigmaA. We therefore
propose that sigma1.1 autoinhibits promoter DNA binding of free sigmaA by
stabilizing a compact organization of the sigma factor domains that is unable to 
bind DNA.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2008.09.008 
PMCID: PMC2677525
PMID: 18940669  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Arch Dermatol Res. 2009 Mar;301(3):205-17. doi: 10.1007/s00403-008-0881-y. Epub
2008 Sep 5.

Transgenic expression of S100A2 in hairless mouse skin enhances Cxcl13 mRNA in
response to solar-simulated radiation.

Li Y(1), Gudjonsson JE, Woods TL, Zhang T, Johnston A, Stoll SW, Elder JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0932,
USA.

S100A2 is a homodimeric protein that undergoes oxidative cross-linking and
translocation from the nucleus to the cytosol in the context of oxidative stress.
Suggestive of a role for S100A2 in the cutaneous response to ultraviolet light,
we found altered S100A2 immunostaining in photodamaged human skin, and
crosslinking of S100A2 after ultraviolet A (UVA) irradiation of normal human
keratinocytes (NHK). Skin from mice, rats, and rabbits did not contain S100A2
protein, whereas skin samples from pigs, frogs and humans were strongly positive.
Survival after UVA irradiation was significantly greater in NHK compared to mouse
keratinocytes, suggesting a protective role for S100A2. To test this hypothesis
in vivo, we expressed S100A2 in SKH2/J hairless mice under the control of a
bovine keratin 5 promoter, and compared responses of TG and WT mice from 1 to 7
days after a single dose (0.5-1 MED) of solar-simulated radiation (SSR) from
UVA-340 bulbs. WT and TG mice manifested a similarly robust response to SSR,
characterized by epidermal hyperplasia, marked induction of p21(WAF), and a
twofold increase in p53. Thymine dimers (TD) were markedly increased in the
epidermis and the dermis, but while over 95% of the epidermal TD were removed by 
5-6 days, elevated dermal TD persisted nearly unchanged for 7 days. Global
transcriptional profiling of WT and TG mice revealed strong induction of multiple
transcripts, including keratins K6 and K16, defensin beta 3, S100A8, S100A9,
Sprr2i and Sprr2f. However, the only S100A2-dependent difference we observed was 
an induction of Cxcl13 transcripts in TG, but not WT mice (4.4-fold vs. 0.7-fold,
n = 3, P = 0.022). This finding was confirmed in an independent set of mice
analyzed by quantitative RT-PCR (8.8-fold vs. 1.2-fold, n = 4, P = 0.001). The
finding of persistent dermal DNA damage after suberythemal doses of SSR merits
further study.

DOI: 10.1007/s00403-008-0881-y 
PMID: 18773213  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


186. DNA Repair (Amst). 2008 Nov 1;7(11):1916-23. doi: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2008.07.015.
Epub 2008 Sep 6.

AlkB demethylases flip out in different ways.

Sundheim O(1), Talstad VA, Vågbø CB, Slupphaug G, Krokan HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Norwegian University of 
Science and Technology, Erling Skjalgssons Gate 1, Trondheim, Norway.

Aberrant methylations in DNA are repaired by base excision repair (BER) and
direct repair by a methyltransferase or by an oxidative demethylase of the AlkB
type. Yang et al. [Nature 452 (2008) 961-966] have now solved the crystal
structure of AlkB and human AlkB homolog 2 (hABH2) in complex with DNA using an
ingenious crosslinking strategy to stabilize the DNA-protein complex. AlkB
proteins have similar catalytic domains, but different DNA recognition motifs.
Whereas AlkB mainly makes contact with the damaged strand, hABH2 makes numerous
contacts with both strands. hABH2 flips out the damaged base and fills the vacant
space by a hydrophobic amino acid residue similar to DNA glycosylases,
essentially without distorting the double helix structure. In contrast, AlkB
squeezes together the bases flanking the flipped-out base to maintain the base
stack. This unprecedented flipping mechanism and the differences between AlkB and
hABH2 in contacting the DNA strands explain their preferences for single
stranded- and double stranded DNA, respectively.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2008.07.015 
PMID: 18723127  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Virology. 2008 Jun 20;376(1):225-35. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2008.03.031. Epub 2008 
May 1.

Vaccinia virus early gene transcription termination factors VTF and Rap94
interact with the U9 termination motif in the nascent RNA in a transcription
ternary complex.

Christen LA(1), Piacente S, Mohamed MR, Niles EG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, SUNY School of Medicine, Buffalo,
NY 14214, USA.

The vaccinia virus core contains a 195 kb double stranded DNA genome, a
multi-subunit RNA polymerase, transcription initiation and termination factors
and mRNA processing enzymes. Upon infection, vaccinia virus early gene
transcription takes place in the virus core. Transcription initiates at early
promoters and terminates in response to a termination motif, UUUUUNU, in the
nascent mRNA. Early gene transcription termination requires the vaccinia virus
termination factor, VTF, a single stranded DNA-dependent ATPase, and NPH I, the
Rap94 subunit of the virion RNA polymerase, as well as the presence of the
UUUUUNU motif in the nascent RNA. The position of UUUUUNU in the ternary complex 
suggests that it serves as a site of interaction with one or more components of
the transcription termination complex. In order to identify the factor(s) that
interact with UUUUUNU a series of direct UV photo crosslinking and ribonuclease A
protection studies were undertaken. Through these analyses both VTF and Rap94
were shown to interact with UUUUUNU in the isolated ternary complex. Evidence
indicates that the interaction is not mutually exclusive. VTF was shown to bind
to UUUUUNU through the N-terminal domain of the large D1 subunit. Furthermore,
VTF protects from RNAse A digestion both the 5' region of the nascent transcript 
as well as a large central component containing UUUUUNU. The addition of an
oligonucleotide containing the (5Br)U9 sequence both directly inhibits
transcription termination, in vitro and inhibits UV photo crosslinking of VTF to 
the nascent RNA in the ternary complex. These results support a model in which
the availability of the UUUUUNU motif outside of the transcribing RNA polymerase 
permits binding of both transcription termination factors, VTF and Rap94, to
UUUUUNU. The assembly of this termination complex initiates the transcription
termination sequence.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2008.03.031 
PMCID: PMC2478747
PMID: 18455214  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Mol Cell. 2008 May 23;30(4):472-85. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2008.04.001.

A three-dimensional model of a group II intron RNA and its interaction with the
intron-encoded reverse transcriptase.

Dai L(1), Chai D, Gu SQ, Gabel J, Noskov SY, Blocker FJ, Lambowitz AM, Zimmerly
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB T2N 1N4,
Canada.

Group II introns are self-splicing ribozymes believed to be the ancestors of
spliceosomal introns. Many group II introns encode reverse transcriptases that
promote both RNA splicing and intron mobility to new genomic sites. Here we used 
a circular permutation and crosslinking method to establish 16 intramolecular
distance relationships within the mobile Lactococcus lactis Ll.LtrB-DeltaORF
intron. Using these new constraints together with 13 established tertiary
interactions and eight published crosslinks, we modeled a complete
three-dimensional structure of the intron. We also used the circular permutation 
strategy to map RNA-protein interaction sites through fluorescence quenching and 
crosslinking assays. Our model provides a comprehensive structural framework for 
understanding the function of group II ribozymes, their natural structural
variations, and the mechanisms by which the intron-encoded protein promotes RNA
splicing and intron mobility. The model also suggests an arrangement of active
site elements that may be conserved in the spliceosome.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2008.04.001 
PMCID: PMC2724966
PMID: 18424209  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Methods Mol Biol. 2008;451:185-200. doi: 10.1007/978-1-59745-102-4_13.

Biochemical analyses of the interactions between viral polymerases and RNAs.

Kim YC(1), Cheng Kao C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Biophysics, 103 Biochemistry/Biophysics Building,
Texas A&M University, 2128 TAMU, College Station, TX 77843-2128, USA.

The interaction between viral polymerases and their cognate RNAs is vital to
regulate the timing and abundance of viral replication products. Despite this,
only minimal detailed information is available for the interaction between viral 
polymerases and cognate RNAs. We study the biochemical interactions using two
viral polymerases that could serve as models for other plus-strand RNA viruses:
the replicase from the tripartite brome mosaic virus (BMV), and the recombinant
RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) from hepatitis C virus (HCV). Replicase
binding sites in the BMV RNAs were mapped using a template competition assay. The
minimal length of RNA required for RNA binding by the HCV RdRp was determined
using fluorescence spectroscopy. Lastly, regions of the HCV RdRp that contact the
RNA were determined by a method coupling reversible protein-RNA crosslinking,
affinity purification, and mass spectrometry. These analyses of RdRp-RNA
interaction will be presented as three topics in this chapter.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-59745-102-4_13 
PMID: 18370256  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Hum Mol Genet. 2008 Jun 1;17(11):1641-52. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddn054. Epub 2008 Feb 
19.

FANCM of the Fanconi anemia core complex is required for both monoubiquitination 
and DNA repair.

Xue Y(1), Li Y, Guo R, Ling C, Wang W.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of
Health, 333 Cassell Drive, TRIAD Center Room 3000, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.

In response to DNA damage, the Fanconi anemia (FA) core complex functions as a
signaling machine for monoubiquitination of FANCD2 and FANCI. It remains unclear 
whether this complex can also participate in subsequent DNA repair. We have shown
previously that the FANCM constituent of the complex contains a highly conserved 
helicase domain and an associated ATP-dependent DNA translocase activity. Here we
show that FANCM also possesses an ATP-independent binding activity and an
ATP-dependent bi-directional branch-point translocation activity on a synthetic
four-way junction DNA, which mimics intermediates generated during homologous
recombination or at stalled replication forks. Using an siRNA-based
complementation system, we found that the ATP-dependent activities of FANCM are
required for cellular resistance to a DNA-crosslinking drug, mitomycin C, but not
for the monoubiquitination of FANCD2 and FANCI. In contrast, monoubiquitination
requires the entire helicase domain of FANCM, which has both ATP dependent and
independent activities. These data are consistent with participation of FANCM and
its associated FA core complex in the FA pathway at both signaling through
monoubiquitination and the ensuing DNA repair.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddn054 
PMCID: PMC2902294
PMID: 18285517  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Biol Chem. 2008 Jan;389(1):13-9.

Reassessing the role of a 3'-UTR-binding translational inhibitor in regulation of
circadian bioluminescence rhythm in the dinoflagellate Gonyaulax.

Lapointe M(1), Morse D.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherche en Biologie Végétale, Département de Sciences
Biologiques, Université de Montréal, 4101 Sherbrooke Est, Montréal H1X 2B2,
Québec, Canada.

The nightly bioluminescence of the dinoflagellate Gonyaulax is a circadian rhythm
caused by the presence in cells of specialized bioluminescent organelles, termed 
scintillons, containing the reaction catalyst luciferase, the substrate luciferin
and a luciferin-binding protein (LBP). LBP levels increase at the start of the
night phase because of increased protein synthesis rates in vivo, and this
regulation has been ascribed to circadian binding of an inhibitory protein factor
binding to the 3' untranslated region (UTR) of lbp mRNA at times when LBP is not 
normally synthesized. To purify and characterize the binding factor, the
electrophoretic mobility shift assays and UV crosslinking experiments used to
first characterize the factor were repeated. However, neither these protocols nor
binding to biotinylated RNA probes confirmed the presence of a specific circadian
RNA-binding protein. Furthermore, neither RNA probe screening of a cDNA library
expressed in bacteria nor three-hybrid assays in yeast were successful in
isolating a cDNA encoding a protein able to bind specifically to the lbp 3'UTR.
Taken together, these results suggest that alternative mechanisms for regulating 
lbp translation should now be examined.

DOI: 10.1515/BC.2008.003 
PMID: 18095865  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Nature. 2007 Nov 8;450(7167):198-202.

Imaging Drosophila gene activation and polymerase pausing in vivo.

Lis JT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology and Genetics, 416 Biotechnology Building, Cornell
University, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA. jtl10@cornell.edu

Since the early 1960s, imaging studies of Drosophila sp. polytene chromosomes
have provided unique views of gene transcription in vivo. The dramatic changes in
chromatin structure that accompany gene activation can be visualized as
chromosome puffs. Now, live-cell imaging techniques coupled with protein-DNA
crosslinking assays on a genome-wide scale allow more detailed mechanistic
questions to be addressed and are prompting the re-evaluation of models of
transcription regulation in both Drosophila and mammals.

DOI: 10.1038/nature06324 
PMID: 17994086  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Proteomics. 2007 Nov;7(21):3835-52.

Interactome and interface protocol (2IP): a novel strategy for high sensitivity
topology mapping of protein complexes.

Weerasekera R(1), She YM, Markham KA, Bai Y, Opalka N, Orlicky S, Sicheri F,
Kislinger T, Schmitt-Ulms G.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Research in Neurodegenerative Diseases, University of Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.

A few well-characterized protein assemblies aside, little is known about the
topology and interfaces of multiconstituent protein complexes. Here we report on 
a novel indirect strategy for low-resolution topology mapping of protein
complexes. Following crosslinking, purified protein complexes are subjected to
chemical cleavage with cyanogen bromide (CNBr) and the resulting fragments are
resolved by 2-D electrophoresis. The side-by-side comparison of a thus generated 
and a 2-D CNBr fragment map obtained from uncrosslinked material reveals
candidate gel spots harboring crosslinked CNBr fragments. In-gel trypsinization
and MALDI MS analysis of these informative spots identify the underlying
crosslinked CNBr fragments based on unmodified tryptic peptides. Matching the
cumulative theoretical molecular mass and predicted pI of these crosslinked CNBr 
fragments with original gel spot coordinates is required for confident crosslink 
assignment. The above strategy was successfully validated with the Escherichia
coli RNA polymerase (RNAP) core complex and subsequently applied to query the
quaternary structure of components of the yeast Skp1-Cdc53/Cullin-F box (SCF)
ubiquitin ligase complex. This protocol requires low picomole sample quantities, 
can be applied to multisubunit protein complexes, and does not rely on
specialized data mining software.

DOI: 10.1002/pmic.200700688 
PMID: 17960736  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Virus Res. 2008 Feb;131(2):189-98. Epub 2007 Oct 24.

The alternative splicing factor hnRNP A1 is up-regulated during virus-infected
epithelial cell differentiation and binds the human papillomavirus type 16 late
regulatory element.

Cheunim T(1), Zhang J, Milligan SG, McPhillips MG, Graham SV.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 
8TA, Scotland, UK.

Human papillomavirus type 16 (HPV16) infects anogenital epithelia and is the
etiological agent of cervical cancer. We showed previously that HPV16 infection
regulates the key splicing/alternative splicing factor SF2/ASF and that virus
late transcripts are extensively alternatively spliced. hnRNP A1 is the
antagonistic counterpart of SF2/ASF in alternative splicing. We show here that
hnRNP A1 is also up-regulated during differentiation of virus-infected epithelial
cells in monolayer and organotypic raft culture. Taken together with our previous
data on SF2/ASF, this comprises the first report of HPV-mediated regulation of
expression of two functionally related cellular proteins during epithelial
differentiation. Further, using electrophoretic mobility shift assays and UV
crosslinking we demonstrate that hnRNP A1 binds the HPV16 late regulatory element
(LRE) in differentiated HPV16 infected cells. The LRE has been shown to be
important in temporally controlling virus late gene expression during epithelial 
differentiation. We suggest that increased levels of these cellular RNA
processing factors facilitate appropriate alternative splicing necessary for
production of virus late transcripts in differentiated epithelial cells.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2007.09.006 
PMCID: PMC2635527
PMID: 17950949  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Nov 3;362(4):835-41. Epub 2007 Aug 27.

A unique and highly efficient non-viral DNA/siRNA delivery system based on
PEI-bisepoxide nanoparticles.

Swami A(1), Kurupati RK, Pathak A, Singh Y, Kumar P, Gupta KC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology, Mall Road, Delhi University
Campus, Delhi 110 007, India.

Delivery of DNA and siRNA into mammalian cells is a powerful technique in
treating various diseases caused by single gene defects. Herein, we report a
highly efficient delivery system using 1,4-butanediol diglycidyl ether
(bisepoxide) crosslinked polyethylenimine (PEI) nanoparticles (PN). The
nanoparticle/DNA complexes (nanoplexes) exibited approximately 2.5- to 5.0-fold
gene transfer efficacy and decreased cytotoxicity in cultured cell lines,
compared to the native PEI (25 kDa) (gold standard) and commercially available
transfection agents such as Lipofectamine 2000 and Fugene. The bisepoxide
crosslinking results in change in amine ratio in PEI; however, it retains the net
charge on PN unaltered. A series of nanoparticles obtained by varying the degree 
of crosslinking was found to be in the size range of 69-77 nm and the zeta
potential varying from +35 to 40 mV. The proposed system was also found to
deliver siRNA efficiently into HEK cells, resulting in approximately 70%
suppression of the targetted gene (GFP).

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2007.08.073 
PMID: 17822674  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007;35(15):5213-22. Epub 2007 Aug 1.

Modeling and structure function analysis of the putative anchor site of yeast
telomerase.

Lue NF(1), Li Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, W. R. Hearst Microbiology Research
Center, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, 1300 York Avenue, New York, 
NY 10021, USA. nflue@med.cornell.edu

Telomerase is a ribonucleoprotein reverse transcriptase responsible for extending
one strand of the telomere terminal repeats. Unique among reverse transcriptases,
telomerase is thought to possess a DNA-binding domain (known as anchor site) that
allows the enzyme to add telomere repeats processively. Previous crosslinking and
mutagenesis studies have mapped the anchor site to an N-terminal region of TERT, 
and the structure of this region of Tetrahymena TERT was recently determined at
atomic resolutions. Here we use a combination of homology modeling, electrostatic
calculation and site-specific mutagenesis analysis to identify a positively
charged, functionally important surface patch on yeast TERT. This patch is lined 
by both conserved and non-conserved residues, which when mutated, caused loss of 
telomerase processivity in vitro and telomere shortening in vivo. In addition, we
demonstrate that a point mutation in this domain of yeast TERT simultaneously
enhanced the repeat addition processivity of telomerase and caused telomere
elongation. Our data argue that telomerase anchor site has evolved
species-specific residues to interact with species-specific telomere repeats. The
data also reinforce the importance of telomerase processivity in regulating
telomere length.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkm531 
PMCID: PMC1976438
PMID: 17670795  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Curr Biol. 2007 Jun 5;17(11):922-31.

A receptor-like kinase mediates the response of Arabidopsis cells to the
inhibition of cellulose synthesis.

Hématy K(1), Sado PE, Van Tuinen A, Rochange S, Desnos T, Balzergue S, Pelletier 
S, Renou JP, Höfte H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Cellulaire, UR501, Institut Jean-Pierre Bourgin,
Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique Centre de Versailles, Route de St
Cyr, 78026 Versailles, France.

Comment in
    Curr Biol. 2007 Jul 17;17(14):R541-2.

BACKGROUND: A major challenge is to understand how the walls of expanding plant
cells are correctly assembled and remodeled, often in the presence of
wall-degrading micro-organisms. Plant cells, like yeast, react to cell-wall
perturbations as shown by changes in gene expression, accumulation of ectopic
lignin, and growth arrest caused by the inhibition of cellulose synthesis.
RESULTS: We have identified a plasma-membrane-bound receptor-like kinase
(THESEUS1), which is present in elongating cells. Mutations in THE1 and
overexpression of a functional THE1-GFP fusion protein did not affect wild-type
(WT) plants but respectively attenuated and enhanced growth inhibition and
ectopic lignification in seedlings mutated in cellulose synthase CESA6 without
influencing the cellulose deficiency. A T-DNA insertion mutant for THE1 also
attenuated the growth defect and ectopic-lignin production in other but not all
cellulose-deficient mutants. The deregulation of a small number of genes in cesA6
mutants depended on the presence of THE1. Some of these genes are involved in
pathogen defense, in wall crosslinking, or in protecting the cell against
reactive oxygen species.
CONCLUSIONS: The results show that THE1 mediates the response of growing plant
cells to the perturbation of cellulose synthesis and may act as a
cell-wall-integrity sensor.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2007.05.018 
PMID: 17540573  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Laryngorhinootologie. 2007 May;86(5):384-90; quiz 391.

[Mitomycin C in head and neck surgical procedures].

[Article in German]

Scheithauer MO(1), Riechelmann H.

Author information: 
(1)HNO-Universitätsklinik und Poliklinik Ulm. marc.scheithauer@uniklinikulm.de

Mitomycin C (MMC) is frequently used in combination chemotherapy. Its metabolites
bind to DNA-molecules and causes DNA crosslinking, which interferes with the
synthesis of DNA, RNA and proteins. MMC is thus able to reduce fibroblast
proliferation. Moreover, MMC particularly inhibits the synthesis of extracellular
matrix proteins including fibronectin and various collagens. These properties
have been demonstrated in several experimental studies. Beside its merits in
treatment of malignancies, MMC may thus be useful to prevent hypertrophic scars
and keloids, adhesions and ostial restenosis following head and neck surgical
procedures. Clinically, MMC has been applied to prevent scarring after
ophthalmologic surgery. Recent experimental and clinical trials investigating the
effects of MMC on wound healing following head and neck surgical procedures are
reviewed.

DOI: 10.1055/s-2007-966390 
PMID: 17492533  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


199. ORL J Otorhinolaryngol Relat Spec. 2007;69(4):218-25. Epub 2007 Apr 4.

Downregulation of Fanconi anemia genes in sporadic head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma.

Wreesmann VB(1), Estilo C, Eisele DW, Singh B, Wang SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, University of
California, San Francisco, CA, USA.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Much of our understanding of human cancer has come from studies 
of the hereditary cancer predisposition syndromes. Fanconi anemia (FA) is an
autosomal recessive disorder characterized by cellular hypersensitivity to DNA
crosslinking agents, progressive bone marrow failure, and cancer predisposition
to solid malignancies, especially head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). 
Since FA pathway-deficient cells are hypersensitive to DNA crosslinking
chemotherapy agents, the presence of somatic FA gene inactivation in sporadic
cancers may be of clinical interest. This study sought to determine the frequency
of FA gene downregulation in sporadic HNSCC.
METHODS: The expression of the FA genes FANCA, FANCB, FANCC, FANCD2, FANCE,
FANCF, FANCG, FANCJ, FANCL and FANCM in 11 HNSCC cell lines and 49 tongue
carcinoma samples was studied with quantitative real-time polymerase chain
reaction.
RESULTS: Downregulation of at least one FA gene was observed in 3 of 11 HNSCC
cell lines and 66% of tongue carcinoma samples. FANCB, FANCF, FANCJ and FANCM
were most commonly affected by downregulation, whereas downregulation of FANCA,
FANCE and FANCD2 was rare.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggest that downregulation of FA genes is common in
sporadic HNSCC. The clinical implications of this finding merit further study. .

Copyright (c) 2007 S. Karger AG, Basel

DOI: 10.1159/000101542 
PMID: 17409780  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


200. EMBO J. 2007 Apr 18;26(8):2104-14. Epub 2007 Mar 29.

FAAP100 is essential for activation of the Fanconi anemia-associated DNA damage
response pathway.

Ling C(1), Ishiai M, Ali AM, Medhurst AL, Neveling K, Kalb R, Yan Z, Xue Y,
Oostra AB, Auerbach AD, Hoatlin ME, Schindler D, Joenje H, de Winter JP, Takata
M, Meetei AR, Wang W.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of
Health, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.

The Fanconi anemia (FA) core complex plays a central role in the DNA damage
response network involving breast cancer susceptibility gene products, BRCA1 and 
BRCA2. The complex consists of eight FA proteins, including a ubiquitin ligase
(FANCL) and a DNA translocase (FANCM), and is essential for monoubiquitination of
FANCD2 in response to DNA damage. Here, we report a novel component of this
complex, termed FAAP100, which is essential for the stability of the core complex
and directly interacts with FANCB and FANCL to form a stable subcomplex.
Formation of this subcomplex protects each component from proteolytic degradation
and also allows their coregulation by FANCA and FANCM during nuclear
localization. Using siRNA depletion and gene knockout techniques, we show that
FAAP100-deficient cells display hallmark features of FA cells, including
defective FANCD2 monoubiquitination, hypersensitivity to DNA crosslinking agents,
and genomic instability. Our study identifies FAAP100 as a new critical component
of the FA-BRCA DNA damage response network.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601666 
PMCID: PMC1852792
PMID: 17396147  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Cancer Biol Ther. 2007 May;6(5):654-60. Epub 2007 Feb 7.

Gene-specific selection against experimental fanconi anemia gene inactivation in 
human cancer.

Gallmeier E(1), Hucl T, Calhoun ES, Cunningham SC, Bunz F, Brody JR, Kern SE.

Author information: 
(1)The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

The Fanconi anemia (FA) gene family comprises at least 12 genes interacting in a 
common pathway involved in DNA repair. To gain insight into the role of FA gene
inactivation occurring in tumors among the general population, we endogenously
targeted in cancer cells four FA genes that act at different stages of the FA
pathway. After successful mono-allelic deletion of all genes, the sequential
homozygous deletion was achieved only for FANCC and FANCG, acting upstream, but
not for BRCA2 or FANCD2, acting downstream in the FA pathway. Targeting of the
second allele in in BRCA2 and FANCD2 heterozygote clones resulted in redeletion
exclusively of the already defective allele in multiple instances (13x concerning
BRCA2, 25x concerning FANCD2), strongly suggesting a detrimental phenotype.
Unlike complete FANCD2 disruption, the mere reduction of FANCD2 protein levels
had no discernible effect. In addition, we confirmed that human cancer cells
harboring the Seckel ATR mutation display impaired FANCD2 monoubiquitination and 
FANCD2 nuclear focus formation, as well as an increased sensitivity to DNA
interstrand-crosslinking agents. Nevertheless, these cells were viable,
indicating an ATR-independent function of FANCD2, distinct from its major known
functions, to be responsible for the detrimental effects of FANCD2 loss. In
conclusion, we established the downstream FA genes FANCD2 and BRCA2 to represent 
particularly vulnerable parts of the FA pathway, providing direct evidence for
the paradoxical assumption that their inactivation could be predominantly
selected against in cancer cells. This would explain why certain FA gene defects,
despite an apparent selection for FA pathway inactivation in cancer, are rarely
observed in tumors among the general population.

DOI: 10.4161/cbt.6.5.3978 
PMID: 17387268  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007;35(6):1885-96. Epub 2007 Mar 1.

Studies on the function of the riboregulator 6S RNA from E. coli: RNA polymerase 
binding, inhibition of in vitro transcription and synthesis of RNA-directed de
novo transcripts.

Gildehaus N(1), Neusser T, Wurm R, Wagner R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Physikalische Biologie, Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf,
Düsseldorf, Germany.

Escherichia coli 6S RNA represents a non-coding RNA (ncRNA), which, based on the 
conserved secondary structure and previous functional studies, had been suggested
to interfere with transcription. Selective inhibition of sigma-70 holoenzymes,
preferentially at extended -10 promoters, but not stationary-phase-specific
transcription was described, suggesting a direct role of 6S RNA in the transition
from exponential to stationary phase. To elucidate the underlying mechanism, we
have analysed 6S RNA interactions with different forms of RNA polymerase by gel
retardation and crosslinking. Preferred binding of 6S RNA to Esigma(70) was
confirmed, however weaker binding to Esigma(38) was also observed. The
crosslinking analysis revealed direct contact between a central 6S RNA sequence
element and the beta/beta' and sigma subunits. Promoter complex formation and in 
vitro transcription analysis with exponential- and stationary-phase-specific
promoters and the corresponding holoenzymes demonstrated that 6S RNA interferes
with transcription initiation but does not generally distinguish between
exponential- and stationary-phase-specific promoters. Moreover, we show for the
first time that 6S RNA acts as a template for the transcription of defined RNA
molecules in the absence of DNA. In conclusion, this study reveals new aspects of
6S RNA function.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkm085 
PMCID: PMC1874619
PMID: 17332013  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2006 Oct 31;86(40):2853-7.

[Development of a DNA chip screening mitochondrial DNA mutations in patients with
diabetes mellitus].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu SM(1), Zhou X, Zheng F, Li X, Qin H, Zhang HM, Li D.

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Diagnosis Center, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan 430071,
China.

OBJECTIVE: To establish a rapid and precise high-throughput mitochondrial (mt)
DNA chip and to investigate the relationship between mtDNA tRNA Leu (UUR) and ND1
gene mutations and diabetes mellitus.
METHODS: A wild-type and mutant probes of 28 loci in tRNA Leu (UUR) and ND1 gene 
were immobilized on the Hybond N + nylon membrane by UV-crosslinking, then the
mtDNA chips were used to detect 28 loci mutation in 200 cases of type 2 diabetes 
mellitus and 210 matched healthy controls. All the mutations were further
confirmed by DNA sequencing. Mfold and Antherprot softwares were used to predict 
the secondary structures of the mutant gene and protein.
RESULTS: The mtDNA chip, which could detect 28 loci mutations, was successfully
developed. In diabetic group, there were 2 (1.0%) cases of T3 290C mutation, 6
(3.0%) of G3 316A (Ala-->Thr) mutation, 5 (2.5%) of T 3 394C (Tyr-->His)
mutation, 1 (0.5%) of T3 593 C (Val-->Ala) mutation, 1 (0.5%) of A3 606G
(Leu-->Leu) mutation, 8 (4.0%) of A4 164G (Met-->Met) mutation, 2 (1.0%) of T4
216C (Met-->His) mutation. In the controls, 1 (0.5%) carrier of G3 316A mutation 
and 5 (2.4%) carriers of A4 164G mutation were found. There was significant
difference between two groups for T3 394C mutation frequencies (P = 0.027). The
secondary structures of the mutant proteins of G3 316A, T3 394C, T3 593C and T4
216C mutations were all different from those of the wild-types'.
CONCLUSION: mtDNA chip is a rapid and reliable high-throughput method for
mutations detection, and T3 394C mutation in ND1 gene might contribute to the
pathogenesis of mitochondrial diabetes.


PMID: 17200023  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


204. J Mol Biol. 2007 Feb 2;365(5):1326-36. Epub 2006 Oct 21.

Towards elucidation of the mechanism of UV1C, a deoxyribozyme with photolyase
activity.

Chinnapen DJ(1), Sen D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Simon Fraser University,
8888 University Drive, Burnaby, British Columbia Canada V5A 1S6.

Among the unexpected chemistries that can be catalyzed by nucleic acid enzymes is
photochemistry. We have reported the in vitro selection of a small,
cofactor-independent deoxyribozyme, UV1C, capable of repairing thymine dimers in 
a DNA substrate, most optimally with light at a wavelength of >300 nm. We
hypothesized that a guanine quadruplex functioned both as a light antenna and an 
electron source for the repair of the substrate within the enzyme-substrate
complex. Here, we report structural and mechanistic investigations of that
hypothesis. Contact-crosslinking and guanosine to inosine mutational studies
reveal that the thymine dimer and the guanine quadruplex are positioned close to 
each other in the deoxyribozyme-substrate complex, and permit us to refine the
structure and topology of the folded deoxyribozyme. In exploring the substrate
utilization capabilities of UV1C, we find it to be able to repair uracil dimers
as well as thymine dimers, as long as they are present in an overall
deoxyribonucleotide milieu. Some surprising similarities with bacterial CPD
photolyase enzymes are noted.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2006.10.062 
PMID: 17141270  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Mech Dev. 2006 Nov;123(11):801-18. Epub 2006 Aug 22.

Drosophila alpha-actinin in ovarian follicle cells is regulated by EGFR and Dpp
signalling and required for cytoskeletal remodelling.

Wahlström G(1), Norokorpi HL, Heino TI.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Programme/Institute of Biotechnology, Viikki Biocenter, 
P.O. Box 56 (Viikinkaari 9), FIN-00014, University of Helsinki, Finland.
gudrun.wahlstrom@helsinki.fi

alpha-Actinin is an evolutionarily conserved actin filament crosslinking protein 
with functions in both muscle and non-muscle cells. In non-muscle cells,
interactions between alpha-actinin and its many binding partners regulate cell
adhesion and motility. In Drosophila, one non-muscle and two muscle-specific
alpha-actinin isoforms are produced by alternative splicing of a single gene. In 
wild-type ovaries, alpha-actinin is ubiquitously expressed. The non-muscle
alpha-actinin mutant Actn(Delta233), which is viable and fertile, lacks
alpha-actinin expression in ovarian germline cells, while somatic follicle cells 
express alpha-actinin at late oogenesis. Here we show that this latter population
of alpha-actinin, termed FC-alpha-actinin, is absent from the dorsoanterior
follicle cells, and we present evidence that this is the result of a negative
regulation by combined Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and
Decapentaplegic signalling. Furthermore, EGFR signalling increased the F-actin
bundling activity of ectopically expressed muscle-specific alpha-actinin. We also
describe a novel morphogenetic event in the follicle cells that occurs during egg
elongation. This event involves a transient repolarisation of the basal actin
fibres and the assembly of a posterior beta-integrin-dependent adhesion site
accumulating alpha-actinin and Enabled. Clonal analysis using Actn null alleles
demonstrated that although alpha-actinin was not necessary for actin fibre
formation or maintenance, the cytoskeletal remodelling was perturbed, and Enabled
did not localise in the posterior adhesion site. Nevertheless, epithelial
morphogenesis proceeded normally. This work provides the first evidence that
alpha-actinin is involved in the organisation of the cytoskeleton in a non-muscle
tissue in Drosophila.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mod.2006.08.004 
PMID: 17008069  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Oncogene. 2006 Sep 25;25(43):5875-84.

Fanconi anaemia genes and susceptibility to cancer.

Mathew CG(1).

Author information: 
(1)King's College London School of Medicine, Division of Genetics and Molecular
Medicine, Guy's Hospital, London, UK. christopher.mathew@genetics.kcl.ac.uk

Fanconi anaemia (FA) is a rare recessive disorder associated with chromosomal
fragility, aplastic anaemia, congenital abnormalities and a high risk of cancer, 
including acute myeloid leukaemia and squamous cell carcinomas. The
identification of 11 different FA genes has revealed a complex web of interacting
proteins that are involved in the recognition or repair of DNA interstrand
crosslinks and perhaps other forms of DNA damage. Bi-allelic mutations in BRCA2
are associated with a rare and highly cancer-prone form of FA, and the DNA
helicase BRIP1 (formerly BACH1) is mutated in FA group J. There is little
convincing evidence that FA heterozygotes are at increased risk of cancer, but
larger studies are needed to address the possibility of modest risk effects.
Somatic inactivation of the FA pathway by mutation or epigenetic silencing has
been observed in several different types of sporadic cancer, and this may have
important implications for targeted chemotherapy. Inhibition of this pathway
represents a possible route to sensitization of tumours to DNA crosslinking drugs
such as cisplatin.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1209878 
PMID: 16998502  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Mutat Res. 2006 Oct 10;601(1-2):113-24. Epub 2006 Aug 21.

Pir51, a Rad51-interacting protein with high expression in aggressive lymphoma,
controls mitomycin C sensitivity and prevents chromosomal breaks.

Henson SE(1), Tsai SC, Malone CS, Soghomonian SV, Ouyang Y, Wall R, Marahrens Y, 
Teitell MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Molecular Genetics, David Geffen
School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Pir51, a protein of unknown function that interacts with Rad51, was identified in
a screen for genes that were highly expressed in aggressive mantle cell lymphoma 
(MCL) versus indolent small lymphocytic lymphoma (SLL) patient samples. We show
that Pir51 is a nuclear protein expressed in a variety of cell types and that its
expression is regulated during the cell cycle in a pattern nearly identical to
Rad51. Also similar to Rad51, Pir51 levels did not change in response to a
variety of DNA damaging agents. siRNA depletion of Pir51 did not reduce
homologous recombination repair (HRR), but sensitized cells to mitomycin C
(MMC)-induced DNA crosslinking and resulted in elevated levels of double-strand
breaks (DSBs) in metaphase chromosome spreads and reduced colony formation.
Therefore, Pir51 maintains genomic integrity and potentially connects the early
response to DNA crosslinks, orchestrated by the ATR kinase and Fanconi Anemia
(FA) proteins, to later stages of Rad51-dependent repair. Our results provide the
first example of a Rad51-binding protein that influences DNA crosslink repair
without affecting homologous recombination repair.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2006.06.016 
PMID: 16920159  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


208. J Am Soc Mass Spectrom. 2006 Nov;17(11):1570-1581. doi:
10.1016/j.jasms.2006.06.002. Epub 2006 Jul 27.

Toward building a database of bifunctional probes for the MS3D investigation of
nucleic acids structures.

Zhang Q(1), Yu ET(1), Kellersberger KA(1), Crosland E(2), Fabris D(3).

Author information: 
(1)University of Maryland Baltimore County, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(2)Villa Julie College, Stevenson, Maryland, USA.
(3)Marlene and Stewart, Greenbaum Cancer Center, University of Maryland Baltimore
County and University of Maryland, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. fabris@umbc.edu.

This report illustrates the approaches employed to investigate critical aspects
of the activity of crosslinking reagents toward nucleic acid substrates, which
should be evaluated to identify candidate probes for mass spectrometric 3D (MS3D)
investigations of biomolecules and macromolecular complexes. Representative
members of different classes of bifunctional reagents were taken into
consideration, including bikethoxal and phenyl-diglyoxal [bis-(1,2-dicarbonyls)],
cisplatin (coordinative binding agents), chlorambucil and nitrogen mustard
[bis-(2-chloroethyl)amines], and sym-triazine trichloride (triazines).
Nanospray-Fourier transform mass spectrometry (FTMS) was applied without
desalting or separation procedures to characterize the covalent products obtained
by probing dinucleotide and trinucleotide substrates under a variety of
experimental conditions in vitro. The carefully controlled composition of these
substrates enabled us to obtain valid comparisons of probe activity toward
individual nucleotides and evaluate possible base-specific effects, including the
stability of the different adducts in solution under the selected reaction
conditions. The gas-phase behavior of the observed products was investigated
using sustained off-resonance irradiation collision-induced dissociation
(SORI-CID) to obtain valuable information for guiding the design of sequencing
experiments and helping the data interpretation. Structured RNA substrates, such 
as HIV-1 stemloop 1, were finally employed to investigate the structural
determinant of adduct formation and highlight the different nature of the spatial
information provided by the various candidate probes.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jasms.2006.06.002 
PMID: 16875836  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Cell. 2006 Jun 16;125(6):1069-82.

rRNA promoter regulation by nonoptimal binding of sigma region 1.2: an additional
recognition element for RNA polymerase.

Haugen SP(1), Berkmen MB, Ross W, Gaal T, Ward C, Gourse RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bacteriology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 420 Henry Mall,
53706, USA.

Regulation of transcription initiation is generally attributable to
activator/repressor proteins that bind to specific DNA sequences. However,
regulators can also achieve specificity by binding directly to RNA polymerase
(RNAP) and exploiting the kinetic variation intrinsic to different RNAP-promoter 
complexes. We report here a previously unknown interaction with Escherichia coli 
RNAP that defines an additional recognition element in bacterial promoters. The
strength of this sequence-specific interaction varies at different promoters and 
affects the lifetime of the complex with RNAP. Selection of rRNA promoter mutants
forming long-lived complexes, kinetic analyses of duplex and bubble templates,
dimethylsulfate footprinting, and zero-Angstrom crosslinking demonstrated that
sigma subunit region 1.2 directly contacts the nontemplate strand base two
positions downstream of the -10 element (within the "discriminator" region). By
making a nonoptimal sigma1.2-discriminator interaction, rRNA promoters create the
short-lived complex required for specific responses to the RNAP binding factors
ppGpp and DksA, ultimately accounting for regulation of ribosome synthesis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2006.04.034 
PMID: 16777598  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Jan 31;103(5):1557-62. Epub 2006 Jan 23.

In vivo identification of ribonucleoprotein-RNA interactions.

Zielinski J(1), Kilk K, Peritz T, Kannanayakal T, Miyashiro KY, Eiríksdóttir E,
Jochems J, Langel U, Eberwine J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

To understand the role of RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) in the regulation of gene
expression, methods are needed for the in vivo identification of RNA-protein
interactions. We have developed the peptide nucleic acid (PNA)-assisted
identification of RBP technology to enable the identification of proteins that
complex with a target RNA in vivo. Specific regions of the 3' and 5' UTRs of
ankylosis mRNA were targeted by antisense PNAs transported into cortical neurons 
by the cell-penetrating peptide transportan 10. An array of proteins was isolated
in complex with or near the targeted regions of the ankylosis mRNA through
UV-induced crosslinking of the annealed PNA-RNA-RBP complex. The first evidence
for pharmacological modulation of these specific protein-RNA associations was
observed. These data show that the PNA-assisted identification of the RBP
technique is a reliable method to rapidly identify proteins interacting in vivo
with the target RNA.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0510611103 
PMCID: PMC1345716
PMID: 16432185  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005 Dec 14;33(22):7074-89. Print 2005.

The autoregulatory translational control element of poly(A)-binding protein mRNA 
forms a heteromeric ribonucleoprotein complex.

Patel GP(1), Ma S, Bag J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Guelph Guelph,
Ontario, Canada, N1G 2W1.

Repression of poly(A)-binding protein (PABP) mRNA translation involves the
binding of PABP to the adenine-rich autoregulatory sequence (ARS) in the
5'-untranslated region of its own mRNA. In this report, we show that the ARS
forms a complex in vitro with PABP, and two additional polypeptides of 63 and 105
kDa. The 63 and 105 kDa polypeptides were identified, as IMP1, an ortholog of
chicken zip-code binding polypeptide, and UNR, a PABP binding polypeptide,
respectively, by mass spectrometry of the ARS RNA affinity purified samples.
Using a modified ribonucleoprotein (RNP) immunoprecipitation procedure we further
show that indeed, both IMP1 and UNR bind to the ARS containing reporter RNA in
vivo. Although both IMP1 and UNR could bind independently to the ARS RNA in
vitro, their RNA-binding ability was stimulated by PABP. Mutational analyses of
the ARS show that the presence of four of the six oligo(A) regions of the ARS was
sufficient to repress translation and the length of the conserved pyrimidine
spacers between the oligo(A) sequences was important for ARS function. The
ability of mutant ARS RNAs to form the PABP, IMP1 and UNR containing RNP complex 
correlates well with the translational repressor activity of the ARS. There is
also a direct relationship between the length of the poly(A) RNAs and their
ability to form a trimeric complex with PABP, and to repress mRNA translation. UV
crosslinking studies suggest that the ARS is less efficient than a poly(A) RNA of
similar length, to bind to PABP. We show here that the ARS cannot efficiently
form a trimeric complex with PABP; therefore, additional interactions with IMP1
and UNR to form a heteromeric RNP complex may be required for maximal repression 
of PABP mRNA translation under physiological conditions.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gki1014 
PMCID: PMC1316114
PMID: 16356927  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Methods Mol Med. 2005;119:291-315.

Analysis of regulatory motifs within HPV transcripts.

Cumming SA(1), Graham SV.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Life Sciences, Division of Virology, University of
Glasgow, Scotland, UK.

Papillomavirus late gene expression is highly dependent on host epithelial cell
differentiation, such that capsid proteins are produced only in differentiating
cells. Several papillomaviruses contain negative regulatory elements (NREs), that
is, short regions of late transcripts that interact with host cellular RNA
processing factors to prevent capsid protein synthesis in undifferentiated cells.
In this chapter, the human papillomavirus (HPV)-16 NRE will be used as an example
to show how cis-acting RNA regulatory elements can be identified and mapped using
transient transfection of reporter gene constructs. The use of reporter gene
assays is also readily applicable to the identification and characterization of
novel promoters and other regulatory sequences in HPV DNA. In vitro RNA-protein
binding techniques, including ultraviolet crosslinking, electrophoretic mobility 
shift assay, and affinity purification of RNA binding proteins, will also be
described, again using the HPV-16 NRE as an example. These techniques may be used
to identify cellular proteins that bind the NRE, allowing its mode of action to
be deduced. They may also be used to study interactions between host cellular
proteins and other protein-binding motifs on HPV mRNA. These interactions are
important for the regulation of HPV gene expression, and have key roles in
splicing, polyadenylation, mRNA export, stability, and translation.

DOI: 10.1385/1-59259-982-6:291 
PMID: 16350408  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


213. J Cell Sci. 2005 Dec 15;118(Pt 24):5797-810.

LEM2 is a novel MAN1-related inner nuclear membrane protein associated with
A-type lamins.

Brachner A(1), Reipert S, Foisner R, Gotzmann J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Max F. Perutz Laboratories, Vienna
Biocenter, Medical University of Vienna, Dr Bohrgasse 9/3, A-1030 Vienna,
Austria.

The LEM (lamina-associated polypeptide-emerin-MAN1) domain is a motif shared by a
group of lamin-interacting proteins in the inner nuclear membrane (INM) and in
the nucleoplasm. The LEM domain mediates binding to a DNA-crosslinking protein,
barrier-to-autointegration factor (BAF). We describe a novel, ubiquitously
expressed LEM domain protein, LEM2, which is structurally related to MAN1. LEM2
contains an N-terminal LEM motif, two predicted transmembrane domains and a
MAN1-Src1p C-terminal (MSC) domain highly homologous to MAN1, but lacks the
MAN1-specific C-terminal RNA-recognition motif. Immunofluorescence microscopy of 
digitonin-treated cells and subcellular fractionation identified LEM2 as a
lamina-associated protein residing in the INM. LEM2 binds to the lamin C tail in 
vitro. Targeting of LEM2 to the nuclear envelope requires A-type lamins and is
mediated by the N-terminal and transmembrane domains. Highly overexpressed LEM2
accumulates in patches at the nuclear envelope and forms membrane bridges between
nuclei of adjacent cells. LEM2 structures recruit A-type lamins, emerin, MAN1 and
BAF, whereas lamin B and lamin B receptor are excluded. Our data identify LEM2 as
a novel A-type-lamin-associated INM protein involved in nuclear structure
organization.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.02701 
PMID: 16339967  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Mutagenesis. 2005 Nov;20(6):433-40. Epub 2005 Oct 19.

The ATPase motif in RAD51D is required for resistance to DNA interstrand
crosslinking agents and interaction with RAD51C.

Gruver AM(1), Miller KA, Rajesh C, Smiraldo PG, Kaliyaperumal S, Balder R, Stiles
KM, Albala JS, Pittman DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Cardiovascular Genomics, Medical University of
Ohio, Toledo, OH 43614-5804, USA.

Homologous recombination (HR) is a mechanism for repairing DNA interstrand
crosslinks and double-strand breaks. In mammals, HR requires the activities of
the RAD51 family (RAD51, RAD51B, RAD51C, RAD51D, XRCC2, XRCC3 and DMC1), each of 
which contains conserved ATP binding sequences (Walker Motifs A and B). RAD51D is
a DNA-stimulated ATPase that interacts directly with RAD51C and XRCC2. To test
the hypothesis that ATP binding and hydrolysis by RAD51D are required for the
repair of interstrand crosslinks, site-directed mutations in Walker Motif A were 
generated, and complementation studies were performed in Rad51d-deficient mouse
embryonic fibroblasts. The K113R and K113A mutants demonstrated a respective 96
and 83% decrease in repair capacity relative to wild-type. Further examination of
these mutants, by yeast two-hybrid analyses, revealed an 8-fold reduction in the 
ability to associate with RAD51C whereas interaction with XRCC2 was retained at a
level similar to the S111T control. These cell-based studies are the first
evidence that ATP binding and hydrolysis by RAD51D are required for efficient HR 
repair of DNA interstrand crosslinks.

DOI: 10.1093/mutage/gei059 
PMID: 16236763  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005 Oct 4;33(17):5703-12. Print 2005.

PCNA-MutSalpha-mediated binding of MutLalpha to replicative DNA with mismatched
bases to induce apoptosis in human cells.

Hidaka M(1), Takagi Y, Takano TY, Sekiguchi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Biomolecular Engineering Research Institute, 
6-2-3 Furuedai, Suita, Osaka 565-0874, Japan. hidaka@beri.or.jp

Modified bases, such as O6-methylguanines, are produced in cells exposed to
alkylating agents and cause apoptosis. In human cells treated with
N-methyl-N-nitrosourea, we detected a protein complex composed of MutSalpha,
MutLalpha and PCNA on damaged DNA by immunoprecipitation method using chromatin
extracts, in which protein-protein interactions were stabilized by chemical
crosslinking. Time course experiments revealed that MutSalpha, consisting of MSH2
and MSH6 proteins, and PCNA bind to DNA to form an initial complex, and
MutLalpha, composed of MLH1 and PMS2, binds to the complex when the DNA is
damaged. This sequential mode of binding was further confirmed by the findings
that the association of PCNA-MutSalpha complex on chromatin was observed even in 
the cells that lack MLH1, whereas in the absence of MSH2 no association of
MutLalpha with the chromatin was achieved. Moreover, reduction in the PCNA
content by small-interfering RNA or inhibition of DNA replication by aphidicolin,
an inhibitor of DNA polymerase, significantly reduced the levels of the
PCNA-MutSalpha-MutLalpha complex and also suppressed an increase in the caspase-3
activity, a hallmark for the induction of apoptosis. These observations imply
that the induction of apoptosis is coupled with the progression of DNA
replication through the action of PCNA.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gki878 
PMCID: PMC1243802
PMID: 16204460  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Nat Genet. 2005 Oct;37(10):1063-71. Epub 2005 Sep 4.

XPF nuclease-dependent telomere loss and increased DNA damage in mice
overexpressing TRF2 result in premature aging and cancer.

Muñoz P(1), Blanco R, Flores JM, Blasco MA.

Author information: 
(1)Telomeres and Telomerase Group, Molecular Oncology Program, Spanish National
Cancer Centre, Madrid, Spain.

TRF2 is a telomere-binding protein that has a role in telomere protection. We
generated mice that overexpress TRF2 in the skin. These mice had a severe
phenotype in the skin in response to light, consisting of premature skin
deterioration, hyperpigmentation and increased skin cancer, which resembles the
human syndrome xeroderma pigmentosum. Keratinocytes from these mice were
hypersensitive to ultraviolet irradiation and DNA crosslinking agents. The skin
cells of these mice had marked telomere shortening, loss of the telomeric
G-strand overhang and increased chromosomal instability. Telomere loss in these
mice was mediated by XPF, a structure-specific nuclease involved in
ultraviolet-induced damage repair and mutated in individuals with xeroderma
pigmentosum. These findings suggest that TRF2 provides a crucial link between
telomere function and ultraviolet-induced damage repair, whose alteration
underlies genomic instability, cancer and aging. Finally, we show that a number
of human skin tumors have increased expression of TRF2, further highlighting a
role for TRF2 in skin cancer.

DOI: 10.1038/ng1633 
PMID: 16142233  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Nat Genet. 2005 Sep;37(9):953-7. Epub 2005 Aug 21.

The BRIP1 helicase functions independently of BRCA1 in the Fanconi anemia pathway
for DNA crosslink repair.

Bridge WL(1), Vandenberg CJ, Franklin RJ, Hiom K.

Author information: 
(1)Protein & Nucleic Acid Chemistry Division, MRC Laboratory of Molecular
Biology, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2QH, UK.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2005 Sep;37(9):921-2.

BRIP1 (also called BACH1) is a DEAH helicase that interacts with the BRCT domain 
of BRCA1 (refs. 1-6) and has an important role in BRCA1-dependent DNA repair and 
checkpoint functions. We cloned the chicken ortholog of BRIP1 and established a
homozygous knockout in the avian B-cell line DT40. The phenotype of these brip1
mutant cells in response to DNA damage differs from that of brca1 mutant cells
and more closely resembles that of fancc mutant cells, with a profound
sensitivity to the DNA-crosslinking agent cisplatin and acute cell-cycle arrest
in late S-G2 phase. These defects are corrected by expression of human BRIP1
lacking the BRCT-interaction domain. Moreover, in human cells exposed to
mitomycin C, short interfering RNA-mediated knock-down of BRIP1 leads to a
substantial increase in chromosome aberrations, a characteristic phenotype of
cells derived from individuals with Fanconi anemia. Because brip1 mutant cells
are proficient for ubiquitination of FANCD2 protein, our data indicate that BRIP1
has a function in the Fanconi anemia pathway that is independent of BRCA1 and
downstream of FANCD2 activation.

DOI: 10.1038/ng1627 
PMID: 16116421  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005 Aug 9;33(14):4507-18. Print 2005.

Novel DNA-binding properties of the RNA-binding protein TIAR.

Suswam EA(1), Li YY, Mahtani H, King PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Alabama Birmingham, AL 35295, USA.

TIA-1 related protein binds avidly to uridine-rich elements in mRNA and pre-mRNAs
of a wide range of genes, including interleukin (IL)-8 and vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF). The protein has diverse regulatory roles, which in part
depend on the locus of binding within the transcript, including translational
control, splicing and apoptosis. Here, we observed selective and potent
inhibition of TIAR-RNP complex formation with IL-8 and VEGF 3'-untranslated
regions (3'-UTRs) using thymidine-rich deoxyoligonucleotide (ODN) sequences
derived from the VEFG 3'-UTR. We show by ultraviolet crosslinking and
electrophoretic mobility shift assays that TIAR can bind directly to
single-stranded, thymidine-rich ODNs but not to double-stranded ODNs containing
the same sequence. TIAR had a nearly 6-fold greater affinity for DNA than RNA
(K(d)app = 1.6x10(-9) M versus 9.4 x 10(-9) M). Truncation of TIAR indicated that
the high affinity DNA-binding site overlaps with the RNA-binding site involving
RNA recognition motif 2 (RRM2). However, RRM1 alone could also bind to DNA.
Finally, we show that TIAR can be displaced from single-stranded DNA by active
transcription through the binding site. These results provide a potential
mechanism by which TIAR can shuttle between RNA and DNA ligands.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gki763 
PMCID: PMC1184220
PMID: 16091628  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005 Jul 15;33(12):3866-74. Print 2005.

HnRNP H inhibits nuclear export of mRNA containing expanded CUG repeats and a
distal branch point sequence.

Kim DH(1), Langlois MA, Lee KB, Riggs AD, Puymirat J, Rossi JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Beckman Research Institute of the City of
Hope Duarte, CA, USA.

Myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1) is an autosomal dominant neuromuscular disorder
associated with a (CUG)n expansion in the 3'-untranslated region of the DMPK (DM1
protein kinase) gene. Mutant DMPK mRNAs containing the trinucleotide expansion
are retained in the nucleus of DM1 cells and form discrete foci. The nuclear
sequestration of RNA binding proteins and associated factors binding to the CUG
expansions is believed to be responsible for several of the splicing defects
observed in DM1 patients and could ultimately be linked to DM1 muscular
pathogenesis. Several RNA binding proteins capable of co-localizing with the
nuclear-retained mutant DMPK mRNAs have already been identified but none can
account for the nuclear retention of the mutant transcripts. Here, we have
employed a modified UV crosslinking assay to isolate proteins bound to mutant
DMPK-derived RNA and have identified hnRNP H as an abundant candidate. The
specific binding of hnRNP H requires not only a CUG repeat expansion but also a
splicing branch point distal to the repeats. Suppression of hnRNP H expression by
RNAi rescued nuclear retention of RNA with CUG repeat expansions. The
identification of hnRNP H as a factor capable of binding and possibly modulating 
nuclear retention of mutant DMPK mRNA may prove to be an important link in our
understanding of the molecular mechanisms that lead to DM1 pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gki698 
PMCID: PMC1176012
PMID: 16027111  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


220. BMC Bioinformatics. 2005 Jul 15;6 Suppl 2:S9.

CLPM: a cross-linked peptide mapping algorithm for mass spectrometric analysis.

Tang Y(1), Chen Y, Lichti CF, Hall RA, Raney KD, Jennings SF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Science, University of Arkansas at Little Rock, Little
Rock, Arkansas 72204, USA. YxTang2@UALR.edu

BACKGROUND: Protein-protein, protein-DNA and protein-RNA interactions are of
central importance in biological systems. Quadrapole Time-of-flight (Q-TOF) mass 
spectrometry is a sensitive, promising tool for studying these interactions.
Combining this technique with chemical crosslinking, it is possible to identify
the sites of interactions within these complexes. Due to the complexities of the 
mass spectrometric data of crosslinked proteins, new software is required to
analyze the resulting products of these studies.
RESULT: We designed a Cross-Linked Peptide Mapping (CLPM) algorithm which takes
advantage of all of the information available in the experiment including the
amino acid sequence from each protein, the identity of the crosslinker, the
identity of the digesting enzyme, the level of missed cleavage, and possible
chemical modifications. The algorithm does in silico digestion and crosslinking, 
calculates all possible mass values and matches the theoretical data to the
actual experimental data provided by the mass spectrometry analysis to identify
the crosslinked peptides.
CONCLUSION: Identifying peptides by their masses can be an efficient starting
point for direct sequence confirmation. The CLPM algorithm provides a powerful
tool in identifying these potential interaction sites in combination with
chemical crosslinking and mass spectrometry. Through this cost-effective
approach, subsequent efforts can quickly focus attention on investigating these
specific interaction sites.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-6-S2-S9 
PMCID: PMC1637035
PMID: 16026606  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Comp Biochem Physiol B Biochem Mol Biol. 2005 Aug;141(4):453-60.

The Caenorhabditis elegans FancD2 ortholog is required for survival following DNA
damage.

Dequen F(1), St-Laurent JF, Gagnon SN, Carreau M, Desnoyers S.

Author information: 
(1)CHUL Research Centre, Pediatrics Research Unit and Laval University,
Department of Pediatrics, Canada.

Fanconi anemia (FA) is an autosomal recessive disease characterized by
bone-marrow failure, congenital abnormalities, and cancer susceptibility. There
are 11 FA complementation groups in human where 8 genes have been identified. We 
found that FancD2 is conserved in evolution and present in the genome of the
nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. The gene Y41E3.9 (CeFancD2) encodes a structural
ortholog of human FANCD2 and is composed of 10 predicted exons. Our analysis
showed that exons 6 and 7 were absent from a CeFancD2 EST suggesting the presence
of a splice variant. In an attempt to characterize its role in DNA damage, we
depleted worms of CeFANCD2 using RNAi. When the CeFANCD2(RNAi) worms were treated
with a crosslinking agent, a significant drop in the progeny survival was noted. 
These worms were also sensitive, although to a lesser extent, to ionizing
radiation (IR). Therefore, these data support an important role for CeFANCD2 in
DNA damage response as for its human counterpart. The data also support the
usefulness of C. elegans to study the Fanconi anemia pathway, and emphasize the
biological importance of FANCD2 in DNA damage response throughout evolution.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cbpc.2005.05.010 
PMID: 15979372  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005 May 10;33(8):2640-9. Print 2005.

Binding of pRNA to the N-terminal 14 amino acids of connector protein of
bacteriophage phi29.

Xiao F(1), Moll WD, Guo S, Guo P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, Wildon School of Bioengineering and Purdue Cancer 
Research Center, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA.

During assembly, bacterial virus phi29 utilizes a motor to insert genomic DNA
into a preformed protein shell called the procapsid. The motor contains one
twelve-subunit connector with a 3.6 nm central channel for DNA transportation,
six viral-encoded RNA (packaging RNA or pRNA) and a protein, gp16, with unknown
stoichiometry. Recent DNA-packaging models proposed that the 5-fold procapsid
vertexes and 12-fold connector (or the hexameric pRNA ring) represented a
symmetry mismatch enabling production of a force to drive a rotation motor to
translocate and compress DNA. There was a discrepancy regarding the location of
the foothold for the pRNA. One model [C. Chen and P. Guo (1997) J. Virol., 71,
3864-3871] suggested that the foothold for pRNA was the connector and that the
pRNA-connector complex was part of the rotor. However, one other model suggested 
that the foothold for pRNA was the 5-fold vertex of the capsid protein and that
pRNA was the stator. To elucidate the mechanism of phi29 DNA packaging, it is
critical to confirm whether pRNA binds to the 5-fold vertex of the capsid protein
or to the 12-fold symmetrical connector. Here, we used both purified connector
and purified procapsid for binding studies with in vitro transcribed pRNA.
Specific binding of pRNA to the connector in the procapsid was found by
photoaffinity crosslinking. Removal of the N-terminal 14 amino acids of the gp10 
protein by proteolytic cleavage resulted in undetectable binding of pRNA to
either the connector or the procapsid, as investigated by agarose gel
electrophoresis, SDS-PAGE, sucrose gradient sedimentation and N-terminal peptide 
sequencing. It is therefore concluded that pRNA bound to the 12-fold symmetrical 
connector to form a pRNA-connector complex and that the foothold for pRNA is the 
connector but not the capsid protein.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gki554 
PMCID: PMC1092275
PMID: 15886394  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Exp Cell Res. 2005 May 1;305(2):365-73.

Rapid changes in transcription and chromatin structure of ribosomal genes in
yeast during growth phase transitions.

Fahy D(1), Conconi A, Smerdon MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry and Biophysics, School of Molecular Biosciences, Washington State
University, Pullman, WA 99164-4660, USA.

Transcription of ribosomal genes is coordinated with cellular growth. Changes in 
transcription may be influenced by an alteration in the number of active
ribosomal genes and/or a change in the transcription rate of active genes. We
measured changes in rDNA transcription during growth phase transitions in the
yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae and the concomitant changes in chromatin structure
of the ribosomal genes. A quantitative transcription run-on (TRO) assay was
developed to monitor transcription of ribosomal genes, and rDNA chromatin was
separated into active (non-nucleosomal) and inactive (nucleosomal) genes using
psoralen photo-crosslinking. TRO indicates that transcription levels of ribosomal
genes drop dramatically as cells enter stationary phase, but are rapidly restored
when cells are diluted into fresh medium. However, changes in the proportion of
active genes during these transitions, although equally rapid, represented only a
small fraction of the total rDNA. We conclude that changes in rDNA chromatin
structure are temporally coordinated with growth rate, but quantitatively
insufficient to account for changes in transcription. These results support the
model that regulation of rRNA synthesis occurs mainly by altering the
transcription rate of active ribosomal genes, and changes in the number of active
rDNA gene copies contribute much less to this regulation.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2005.01.016 
PMID: 15817161  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


224. J Cell Biochem. 2005 May 15;95(2):339-51.

Overexpression of GSTA2 protects against cell cycle arrest and apoptosis induced 
by the DNA inter-strand crosslinking nitrogen mustard, mechlorethamine.

Xie J(1), Shults K, Flye L, Jiang F, Head DR, Briggs RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, 
Tennessee 37232-5310, USA.

The effectiveness of bifunctional alkylating nitrogen mustard compounds in
chemotherapy is related to their ability to form DNA inter-strand crosslinks.
Patients exposed to DNA inter-strand crosslinking (ICL) agents subsequently
experience an elevated incidence of myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) and MDS
related acute myeloid leukemia. Fanconi's anemia (FA) patients are deficient in
the repair of crosslink DNA damage and they experience a high incidence of MDS.
These observations indicate that hematopoietic cells are specific target for the 
transforming effects of DNA crosslinking damage. Changes in transcript levels
were characterized in human hematopoietic cells occurring in response to the
nitrogen mustard, mechlorethamine (HN2), but not in response to monofunctional
analogs. Only modest changes in a few gene transcripts were detected in HL60
cells exposed to levels of HN2 tittered to maximal dose that caused growth
suppression with minimal cell death and allowed eventual resumption of normal
cell growth. Under conditions of transient growth suppression, a subset of
glutathione-S-transferase (GST) isoenzyme genes was consistently upregulated
three to fourfold by HN2, but not by monofunctional analogs. Subsequent efforts
to confirm the changes detected by microarray analyses revealed an unexpected
dependence on treatment conditions. The GST alpha class A2 subfamily member
transcripts were upregulated 24 h after a 1 h exposure to HN2 that caused an
extensive, but transient block in late S/G2 cell cycle phase, but were minimally 
altered with continuous exposure. The 1-h exposure to HN2 caused a transient late
S/G2 cell cycle arrest in both the HL-60 cell line and the Colo 320HSR human
colon cancer cell line. Overexpression of GSTA2 by transient transfection
protected Colo 320HSR cells against both cycle arrest and apoptosis following
exposure to HN2. Overexpression of GSTA2 in Colo 320HSR cells induced after
exposure to HN2 did not alter cycle arrest or apoptosis. The results indicate
that human GSTA2 facilitates the protection of cells from HN2 damage and not
repair. Our results are consistent with the possibility that GSTA2 polymorphisms,
variable isoenzyme expression, and variable induced expression may be factors in 
the pathogenesis of MDS.

DOI: 10.1002/jcb.20440 
PMID: 15778998  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


225. EMBO J. 2005 Mar 9;24(5):1009-20. Epub 2005 Feb 3.

The transcriptional coactivator PC4/Sub1 has multiple functions in RNA polymerase
II transcription.

Calvo O(1), Manley JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027,
USA.

Transcription and processing of mRNA precursors are coordinated events that
require numerous complex interactions to ensure that they are successfully
executed. We described previously an unexpected association between a
transcription factor, PC4 (or Sub1 in yeast), and an mRNA polyadenylation factor,
CstF-64 (Rna15 in yeast), and provided evidence that this was important for
efficient transcription elongation. Here we provide insight into the mechanism by
which this occurs. We show that Sub1 and Rna15 are recruited to promoters and
present along the length of several yeast genes. Allele-specific genetic
interactions between SUB1 and genes encoding an RNA polymerase II (RNAP
II)-specific kinase (KIN28) and phosphatase (FCP1) suggest that Sub1 influences
and/or is sensitive to the phosphorylation status of elongating RNAP II.
Remarkably, we find that cells lacking Sub1 display decreased accumulation of
Fcp1, altered RNAP II phosphorylation and decreased crosslinking of RNAP II to
transcribed genes. Our data provide evidence that Rna15 and Sub1 are present
along the length of several genes and that Sub1 facilitates elongation by
influencing enzymes that modify RNAP II.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7600575 
PMCID: PMC554125
PMID: 15692559  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Methods Mol Biol. 2005;300:285-324.

Bacterial virus phi29 DNA-packaging motor and its potential applications in gene 
therapy and nanotechnology.

Guo P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA.

A controllable, 30-nm imitating DNA-packaging motor was constructed. The motor is
driven by six synthetic adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-binding RNA (packaging RNA
[pRNA]) monomers, similar to the driving of a bolt with a hex nut. Conformational
change and sequential action of the RNA with fivefold (viral capsid)/sixfold
(pRNA hexamer) mismatch could ensure continuous rotation of the motor with ATP as
energy. In the presence of ATP and magnesium, a 5-microm synthetic DNA was
packaged using this motor. On average, one ATP was used to translocate two bases 
of DNA. The DNA-filled capsids were subsequently converted into up to 109 PFU/mL 
of infectious virus. The three-dimensional structures of pRNA monomer, dimer, and
hexamer have been probed by photoaffinity crosslinking, chemical modification
interference, cryo-atomic force microscopy, and computer modeling. The pRNA's
size and shape can be controlled and manipulated at will to form stable dimers
and trimers. Cryo-atomic force microscopy revealed that monomers, dimers, and
trimers displayed a checkmark outline, elongated shape, and triangular structure,
respectively. The motor can be turned off by gamma-S-ATP or EDTA and turned on
again with the addition of ATP or magnesium, respectively. The formation of
ordered structural arrays of the motor complex and its components, the retention 
of motor function after the 3'-end extension of the pRNA, and the ease of RNA
dimer, trimer, and hexamer manipulation with desired shape and size make this
RNA-containing motor a promising tool for drug and gene delivery and for use in
nanodevices.

DOI: 10.1385/1-59259-858-7:285 
PMID: 15657489  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Biochem J. 2005 Feb 1;385(Pt 3):831-8.

Extracellular RNA is a natural cofactor for the (auto-)activation of Factor
VII-activating protease (FSAP).

Nakazawa F(1), Kannemeier C, Shibamiya A, Song Y, Tzima E, Schubert U, Koyama T, 
Niepmann M, Trusheim H, Engelmann B, Preissner KT.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Allied Health Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental
University, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8519, Japan.

FSAP (Factor VII-activating protease) is a new plasma-derived serine protease
with putative dual functions in haemostasis, including activation of coagulation 
Factor VII and generation of urinary-type plasminogen activator (urokinase). The 
(auto-)activation of FSAP is facilitated by polyanionic glycosaminoglycans, such 
as heparin or dextran sulphate, whereas calcium ions stabilize the active form of
FSAP. In the present study, extracellular RNA was identified and characterized as
a novel FSAP cofactor. The conditioned medium derived from various cell types
such as smooth muscle cells, endothelial cells, osteosarcoma cells or CHO
(Chinese-hamster ovary) cells contained an acidic factor that initiated
(auto-)activation of FSAP. RNase A, but not other hydrolytic enzymes (proteases, 
glycanases and DNase), abolished the FSAP cofactor activity, which was
subsequently isolated by anion-exchange chromatography and unequivocally
identified as RNA. In purified systems, as well as in plasma, different forms of 
natural RNA (rRNA, tRNA, viral RNA and artificial RNA) were able to
(auto-)activate FSAP into the two-chain enzyme form. The specific binding of FSAP
to RNA (but not to DNA) was shown by mobility-shift assays and UV crosslinking,
thereby identifying FSAP as a new extracellular RNA-binding protein, the K(D)
estimated to be 170-350 nM. Activation of FSAP occurred through an RNA-dependent 
template mechanism involving a nucleic acid size of at least 100 nt. In a
purified system, natural RNA augmented the FSAP-dependent Factor VII activation
several-fold (as shown by subsequent Factor Xa generation), as well as the
FSAP-mediated generation of urokinase. Our results provide evidence for the first
time that extracellular RNA, present at sites of cell damage or vascular injury, 
can serve an important as yet unrecognized cofactor function in haemostasis by
inducing (auto-)activation of FSAP through a novel surface-dependent mechanism.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20041021 
PMCID: PMC1134760
PMID: 15654766  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


228. J Gen Virol. 2005 Jan;86(Pt 1):225-9.

Mapping the RNA-binding domain on the Apple chlorotic leaf spot virus movement
protein.

Isogai M(1), Yoshikawa N.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Pathology Laboratory, Faculty of Agriculture, Iwate University, Ueda
3-chome 18-8, Morioka 020-8550, Japan.

The RNA-binding properties of the cell-to-cell movement protein (MP) of Apple
chlorotic leaf spot virus were analysed. MP was expressed in Escherichia coli and
was used in UV-crosslinking analysis, using a digoxigenin-UTP-labelled RNA probe 
and gel-retardation analysis. The analyses demonstrated that MP bound
cooperatively to single-stranded RNA (ssRNA). When analysed for NaCl dependence
of the RNA-binding activity, the majority of the MP could bind ssRNA even in
binding buffer with 1 M NaCl. Furthermore, competition binding experiments showed
that the MP bound preferentially to ssRNA and single-stranded DNA without
sequence specificity. MP deletion mutants were used to identify the RNA-binding
domain by UV-crosslinking analysis. Amino acid residues 82-126 and 127-287
potentially contain two independently active, single-stranded nucleic
acid-binding domains.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.80493-0 
PMID: 15604450  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Dev Dyn. 2005 Jan;232(1):106-18.

Cellular invasion of the chicken corneal stroma during development: regulation by
multiple matrix metalloproteases and the lens.

Fitch JM(1), Kidder JM, Linsenmayer TF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cellular Biology, Tufts University School of
Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02111, USA. john.fitch@tufts.edu

Avian corneal development requires cellular invasion into the acellular matrix of
the primary stroma. Previous results show that this invasion is preceded by the
removal of the fibril-associated type IX collagen, which possibly stabilizes
matrices through interfibrillar cross-bridges secured by covalent crosslinks. In 
the present study, we provide evidence for the expression of three matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs) in early corneas, two of which act cooperatively to
selectively remove type IX collagen in situ. In organ cultures, MMP inhibitors
(either TIMP-2 or a synthetic inhibitor) resulted in arrested development, in
which collagen IX persisted, and the stroma remained compact and acellular. We
also show that blocking covalent crosslinking of collagen allows for cellular
invasion to occur, even when the removal of type IX collagen is prevented. Thus, 
one factor regulating corneal invasion is the physical structure of the matrix,
which can be modified by either selective proteolysis or reducing interfibrillar 
cross-bridges. We also detected another level of regulation of cellular invasion 
involving inhibition by the underlying lens. This block, which seems to influence
invasive behavior independently of matrix modification, is a transient event that
is released in ovo just before invasion proceeds.

DOI: 10.1002/dvdy.20218 
PMID: 15580628  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Lab Invest. 2005 Jan;85(1):109-23.

Small proline-rich proteins 2 are noncoordinately upregulated by IL-6/STAT3
signaling after bile duct ligation.

Nozaki I(1), Lunz JG 3rd, Specht S, Stolz DB, Taguchi K, Subbotin VM, Murase N,
Demetris AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Thomas E Starzl Transplantation Institute, Divisions of Transplantation,
University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

Small proline-rich proteins 2 (SPRR2) are coordinately expressed with other
epidermal differential complex (EDC) genes in the skin. They function as
crosslinking proteins that form bridges between other proteins that comprise the 
cornified cell envelope, which is the major barrier against the environment. IL-6
is invariably produced at sites of biliary tract injury and IL-6-deficient
(IL-6(-/-)) mice show impaired barrier function after bile duct ligation (BDL).
Screening microarray analysis identified noncoordinate expression of SPRR2 as a
candidate gene that is: (a) expressed in biliary epithelial cells (BEC); (b) IL-6
responsive; and (c) potentially related to biliary barrier function. Therefore,
we studied in detail the regulation of BEC SPRR2A expression, in vitro; and
tested the hypothesis that if BEC SPRR2 expression contributes to biliary barrier
function, it should be increased after BDL in IL-6-wild type (IL-6(+/+)) mice and
not in IL-6(-/-) mice. In vitro studies confirmed that IL-6/gp130-signaling,
mediated primarily by signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3),
stimulated noncoordinate BEC SPRR2 expression. In vivo, noncoordinate
upregulation of BEC SPRR2 expression after BDL was seen in the IL-6(+/+) mice and
was unrelated to squamous metaplasia. IL-6(-/-) mice showed deficient BEC SPRR2
expression after BDL associated with impaired barrier function, as evidenced by
smaller diameters of obstructed ducts, decreased bile volume, and an inability to
form 'white bile' compared to IL-6(+/+) mice at 12 weeks after BDL. IL-6
replacement therapy reversed the barrier defect in IL-6(-/-) mice after BDL,
coincident with recovery of SPRR2A expression. SPRR2 in diseased mouse and human 
liver localized subjacent to the apical plasma membrane of BEC lining bile ducts,
but was more diffusely expressed throughout the cytoplasm of cholangioles. In
conclusion, BEC IL-6/gp130/STAT3 signaling noncoordinately upregulates BEC SPRR2 
that appears to contribute to modification of the biliary barrier under
conditions of stress.

DOI: 10.1038/labinvest.3700213 
PMID: 15558059  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Virology. 2004 Nov 24;329(2):328-36.

Protein interactions among the vaccinia virus late transcription factors.

Dellis S(1), Strickland KC, McCrary WJ, Patel A, Stocum E, Wright CF.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, College of Charleston, Charleston, SC 29401, USA.

The viral proteins A1L, A2L, G8R, and H5R positively modulate vaccinia virus late
gene expression. Host-encoded proteins hnRNP A2 and RBM3 may also interact with
these viral factors to influence late gene expression. In these studies, a yeast 
two-hybrid screen and in vitro pulldown and crosslinking experiments were used to
investigate protein--protein interactions among these factors. These studies
confirmed a previous observation that G8R interacts with itself and A1L. However,
self-interactions of A1L and H5R, and interactions between A2L and G8R, A2L and
H5R, and H5R and G8R were also observed. In addition, the proteins hnRNP A2 and
RBM3 both showed some interaction with A2L. Illustration of these interactions is
a step toward understanding the architecture of the late gene transcription
complex as it occurs in poxviruses.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2004.08.017 
PMID: 15518812  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Gastroenterology. 2004 Oct;127(4):1139-49.

Apobec-1 protects intestine from radiation injury through posttranscriptional
regulation of cyclooxygenase-2 expression.

Anant S(1), Murmu N, Houchen CW, Mukhopadhyay D, Riehl TE, Young SG, Morrison AR,
Stenson WF, Davidson NO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St.
Louis, Missouri 63110, USA. sanant@im.wustl.edu

Comment in
    Gastroenterology. 2004 Oct;127(4):1259.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: This study aimed to determine the role of the RNA binding
protein apobec-1 in radioprotection of the intestine.
METHODS: Apobec-1-deleted mice (APOBEC-1(-/-)) and wild-type controls were
treated with 12 Gy of whole-body gamma-irradiation in a cesium irradiator. The
number of surviving intestinal crypts was assessed 3.5 days after irradiation by 
using a clonogenic assay. Cyclooxygenase-2 messenger RNA and protein expression
were determined by real-time polymerase chain reaction and Western blot,
respectively. RNA stability was studied by examining the turnover of a chimeric
transcript containing the cyclooxygenase-2 3' untranslated region cloned
downstream of luciferase complementary DNA. Apobec-1 binding to the
cyclooxygenase-2 3' untranslated region was studied by electrophoretic mobility
shift and UV crosslinking assays.
RESULTS: After gamma-irradiation, the survival of intestinal stem cells decreased
significantly in APOBEC-1(-/-) mice. In wild-type mice treated with
lipopolysaccharide before gamma-irradiation, intestinal stem cells were protected
by marked increases in prostaglandin E 2 mediated by cyclooxygenase-2. No such
effect was observed in the APOBEC-1(-/-) mice. The mechanism of this
radioprotective effect involves the binding of apobec-1 to AU-rich sequences in
the first 60 nucleotides of the 3' untranslated region of cyclooxygenase-2. Upon 
binding to the AU-rich sequences, apobec-1 stabilizes cyclooxygenase-2 messenger 
RNA. This stabilization process does not seem to be mediated by p38
mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways.
CONCLUSIONS: Lipopolysaccharide increases intestinal stem cell survival through
apobec-1-mediated regulation of cyclooxygenase-2 messenger RNA stability.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2004.06.022 
PMID: 15480992  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Plant Physiol. 2004 Oct;136(2):3319-32. Epub 2004 Oct 1.

Crosslinking of ribosomal proteins to RNA in maize ribosomes by UV-B and its
effects on translation.

Casati P(1), Walbot V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Stanford University, Stanford, California
94305-5020, USA. pcasati@stanford.edu

Ultraviolet-B (UV-B) photons can cause substantial cellular damage in
biomolecules, as is well established for DNA. Because RNA has the same absorption
spectrum for UV as DNA, we have investigated damage to this cellular constituent.
In maize (Zea mays) leaves, UV-B radiation damages ribosomes by crosslinking
cytosolic ribosomal proteins S14, L23a, and L32, and chloroplast ribosomal
protein L29 to RNA. Ribosomal damage accumulated during a day of UV-B exposure
correlated with a progressive decrease in new protein production; however, de
novo synthesis of some ribosomal proteins is increased after 6 h of UV-B
exposure. After 16 h without UV-B, damaged ribosomes were eliminated and
translation was restored to normal levels. Ribosomal protein S6 and an S6 kinase 
are phosphorylated during UV-B exposure; these modifications are associated with 
selective translation of some ribosomal proteins after ribosome damage in
mammalian fibroblast cells and may be an adaptation in maize. Neither
photosynthesis nor pigment levels were affected significantly by UV-B,
demonstrating that the treatment applied is not lethal and that maize leaf
physiology readily recovers.

DOI: 10.1104/pp.104.047043 
PMCID: PMC523391
PMID: 15466230  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


234. RNA. 2004 Nov;10(11):1820-30. Epub 2004 Sep 23.

Template-dependent incorporation of 8-N3AMP into RNA with bacteriophage T7 RNA
polymerase.

Gopalakrishna S(1), Gusti V, Nair S, Sahar S, Gaur RK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology, Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope,
1450 E. Duarte Rd., Duarte, CA 91010, USA.

UV-induced photochemical crosslinking is a powerful approach that can be used for
the identification of specific interactions involving nucleic acid-protein and
nucleic acid-nucleic acid complexes. 8-AzidoATP (8-N(3)ATP) is a
photoaffinity-labeling agent which has been widely used to elucidate the ATP
binding site of a variety of proteins. However, its true potential as a
photoactivatable nucleotide analog could not be exploited due to the lack of
8-azidoadenosine phosphoramidite, a monomer used in the synthesis of RNA, and the
inability of 8-N(3)ATP to serve as an efficient substrate for bacteriophage RNA
polymerase. In this study, we explored the ability of SP6, T3, and T7 RNA
polymerases and metal ion cofactors to catalyze the incorporation of 8-N(3)AMP
into RNA. Whereas transcription buffer containing 2.0-2.5 mM Mn(2+) supports T7
RNA polymerase-mediated insertion of 8-N(3)AMP into RNA, a mixture of 2.5 mM
Mn(2+) and 2.5 mM Mg(2+) further improves the yield of 8-N(3)AMP-containing
transcript. In addition, both RNA transcription and reverse transcription proceed
with high fidelity for the incorporation of 8-N(3)AMP and complementary residue, 
respectively. Finally, we show that a high-affinity MS2 coat protein binding
sequence, in which adenosine residues were replaced by 8-azidoadenosine,
crosslinks to the coat protein of the Escherichia coli phage MS2.

DOI: 10.1261/rna.5222504 
PMCID: PMC1370669
PMID: 15388871  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


235. J Mol Biol. 2004 Jul 30;341(1):37-54.

Structural characterization of the RNase E S1 domain and identification of its
oligonucleotide-binding and dimerization interfaces.

Schubert M(1), Edge RE, Lario P, Cook MA, Strynadka NC, Mackie GA, McIntosh LP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada V6T 1Z3.

S1 domains occur in four of the major enzymes of mRNA decay in Escherichia coli: 
RNase E, PNPase, RNase II, and RNase G. Here, we report the structure of the S1
domain of RNase E, determined by both X-ray crystallography and NMR spectroscopy.
The RNase E S1 domain adopts an OB-fold, very similar to that found with PNPase
and the major cold shock proteins, in which flexible loops are appended to a
well-ordered five-stranded beta-barrel core. Within the crystal lattice, the
protein forms a dimer stabilized primarily by intermolecular hydrophobic packing.
Consistent with this observation, light-scattering, chemical crosslinking, and
NMR spectroscopic measurements confirm that the isolated RNase E S1 domain
undergoes a specific monomer-dimer equilibrium in solution with a K(D) value in
the millimolar range. The substitution of glycine 66 with serine dramatically
destabilizes the folded structure of this domain, thereby providing an
explanation for the temperature-sensitive phenotype associated with this mutation
in full-length RNase E. Based on amide chemical shift perturbation mapping, the
binding surface for a single-stranded DNA dodecamer (K(D)=160(+/-40)microM) was
identified as a groove of positive electrostatic potential containing several
exposed aromatic side-chains. This surface, which corresponds to the conserved
ligand-binding cleft found in numerous OB-fold proteins, lies distal to the
dimerization interface, such that two independent oligonucleotide-binding sites
can exist in the dimeric form of the RNase E S1 domain. Based on these data, we
propose that the S1 domain serves a dual role of dimerization to aid in the
formation of the tetrameric quaternary structure of RNase E as described by
Callaghan et al. in 2003 and of substrate binding to facilitate RNA hydrolysis by
the adjacent catalytic domains within this multimeric enzyme.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2004.05.061 
PMID: 15312761  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 Jun 30;32(11):3503-10. Print 2004.

Multiple elements required for translation of plastid atpB mRNA lacking the
Shine-Dalgarno sequence.

Hirose T(1), Sugiura M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Gene Research, Nagoya University, Nagoya 464-8602, Japan.

The mechanism of translational initiation differs between prokaryotes and
eukaryotes. Prokaryotic mRNAs generally contain within their 5'-untranslated
region (5'-UTR) a Shine-Dalgarno (SD) sequence that serves as a ribosome-binding 
site. Chloroplasts possess prokaryotic-like translation machinery, and many
chloroplast mRNAs have an SD-like sequence, but its position is variable. Tobacco
chloroplast atpB mRNAs contain no SD-like sequence and are U-rich in the 5'-UTR
(-20 to -1 with respect to the start codon). In vitro translation assays with
mutated mRNAs revealed that an unstructured sequence encompassing the start
codon, the AUG codon and its context are required for translation. UV
crosslinking experiments showed that a 50 kDa protein (p50) binds to the 5'-UTR. 
Insertion of an additional initiation region (SD-sequence and AUG) in the 5'-UTR,
but not downstream, arrested translation from the authentic site; however, no
inhibition was observed by inserting only an AUG triplet. We hypothesize for
translational initiation of the atpB mRNA that the ribosome enters an upstream
region, slides to the start codon and forms an initiation complex with p50 and
other components.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkh682 
PMCID: PMC443550
PMID: 15229294  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Jun 22;101(25):9429-34. Epub 2004 Jun 14.

Identification of the amino acid sequence in Sindbis virus nsP4 that binds to the
promoter for the synthesis of the subgenomic RNA.

Li ML(1), Stollar V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Microbiology, and Immunology, University of 
Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School,
Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

A gel mobility-shift assay was used to demonstrate the binding of the Sindbis
virus transcriptase to the promoter for the synthesis of subgenomic (SG) RNA. The
assay made use of a P15 fraction (the cell fraction that is pelleted at 15,000 x 
g) from cells infected with recombinant vaccinia virions expressing various
Sindbis virus nonstructural proteins (nsPs) and a (32)P-labeled 24-mer
oligoribonucleotide representing the minimal sequence with SG promoter activity. 
By itself, nsP4, the viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase, did not bind to the SG
promoter; rather, all four nsPs were required for the binding of the
transcriptase to the promoter. UV crosslinking of the transcriptase to a
thiouridine-containing SG promoter, followed by V8 protease digestion of the
complex, generated a peptide fragment that was bound to the SG promoter. This
peptide fragment contained a sequence that corresponded to residues 329-334 of
nsP4. This peptide may be in the fingers domain of nsP4. The peptide that was
identified contained Arg residues at positions 331 and 332. Another Arg is
present at position 327. By changing each of the Arg residues to Ala, we
demonstrated that only the Arg residues at positions 331 and 332 were required
for binding nsP4 to the SG promoter.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0400995101 
PMCID: PMC438993
PMID: 15197279  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Mutat Res. 2004 May 18;549(1-2):5-27.

Identification of a gene expression profile that discriminates indirect-acting
genotoxins from direct-acting genotoxins.

Hu T(1), Gibson DP, Carr GJ, Torontali SM, Tiesman JP, Chaney JG, Aardema MJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Procter and Gamble Company, Miami Valley Laboratories, P.O. Box 538707 09,
Cincinnati, OH 45253-8707, USA.

During the safety evaluation process of new drugs and chemicals, a battery of
genotoxicity tests is conducted starting with in vitro genotoxicity assays.
Obtaining positive results in in vitro genotoxicity tests is not uncommon.
Follow-up studies to determine the biological relevance of positive genotoxicity 
results are costly, time consuming, and utilize animals. More efficient methods, 
especially for identifying a putative mode of action like an indirect mechanism
of genotoxicity (where DNA molecules are not the initial primary targets), would 
greatly improve the risk assessment for genotoxins. To this end, we are
participating in an International Life Sciences Institute (ILSI) project
involving studies of gene expression changes caused by model genotoxins. The
purpose of the work is to evaluate gene expression tools in general, and
specifically for discriminating genotoxins that are direct-acting from
indirect-acting. Our lab has evaluated gene expression changes as well as
micronuclei (MN) in L5178Y TK(+/-) mouse lymphoma cells treated with six
compounds. Direct-acting genotoxins (where DNA is the initial primary target)
that were evaluated included the DNA crosslinking agents, mitomycin C (MMC) and
cisplatin (CIS), and an alkylating agent, methyl methanesulfonate (MMS).
Indirect-acting genotoxins included hydroxyurea (HU), a ribonucleotide reductase 
inhibitor, taxol (TXL), a microtubule inhibitor, and etoposide (ETOP), a DNA
topoisomerase II inhibitor. Microarray gene expression analysis was conducted
using Affymetrix mouse oligonucleotide arrays on RNA samples derived from cells
which were harvested immediately after the 4 h chemical treatment, and 20 h after
the 4 h chemical treatment. The evaluation of these experimental results yields
evidence of differentially regulated genes at both 4 and 24 h time points that
appear to have discriminating power for direct versus indirect genotoxins, and
therefore may serve as a fingerprint for classifying chemicals when their
mechanism of action is unknown.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2003.11.012 
PMID: 15120960  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Chem Biol. 2004 Jan;11(1):47-55.

Site-specific incorporation of a photo-crosslinking component into RNA by T7
transcription mediated by unnatural base pairs.

Kimoto M(1), Endo M, Mitsui T, Okuni T, Hirao I, Yokoyama S.

Author information: 
(1)Protein Research Group, RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho,
Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan.

Comment in
    Chem Biol. 2004 Jan;11(1):18-20.

A photo-sensitive ribonucleotide of 5-iodo-2-oxo(1H) pyridine (Iy) capable of
site-specific incorporation into transcripts was developed. The site-specific Iy 
incorporation into RNA was achieved by T7 transcription mediated by unnatural
base pairing between Iy and its partner, 2-amino-6-(2-thienyl)purine (s). By this
specific transcription, Iy was incorporated into an anti(Raf-1) RNA aptamer,
which binds to human Raf-1 and inhibits the interaction between Raf-1 and Ras.
Protein-dependent photo-dimerization of the aptamer was observed when Iy was
located at specific positions in the aptamer, showing that the site-specific
incorporation of the photo-sensitive component into RNA achieves highly specific 
crosslinking. This specific transcription mediated by the unnatural base pair
would be a powerful tool for generating high-affinity RNA ligands and for
analyzing RNA-RNA and RNA-protein interactions, as well as for constructing
RNA-based nanostructures.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2003.12.016 
PMID: 15112994  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Oncogene. 2004 Apr 15;23(17):3097-106.

RAD6B overexpression confers chemoresistance: RAD6 expression during cell cycle
and its redistribution to chromatin during DNA damage-induced response.

Lyakhovich A(1), Shekhar MP.

Author information: 
(1)Breast Cancer Program, Karmanos Cancer Institute, 110 East Warren Avenue,
Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

The HR6A and HR6B genes, homologs of the yeast RAD6 gene, encode ubiquitin
conjugating enzymes that are required for postreplication repair (PRR) of DNA and
damage-induced mutagenesis. We show here that consistent with its role as a PRR
protein, HR6 protein (referred as RAD6) expression is cell cycle regulated, with 
maximal levels expressed in late S/G2 phases of the cell cycle. Exposure of
MCF10A cells to adriamycin (ADR) causes enhancement in the levels of RAD6B mRNA
and protein. Inclusion of actinomycin D abolishes both basal and ADR-induced
RAD6B transcription indicating that ADR-induced effects on RAD6B transcription
result from an increase in transcriptional activity rather than from regulation
of RAD6B mRNA stability. The increase in RAD6 protein expression observed in
ADR-treated cells is dependent upon transcription and de novo protein synthesis, 
as addition of actinomycin D and cycloheximide eliminated the induction effects. 
Using in vivo crosslinking experiments, we demonstrate that only a small
proportion of RAD6 is associated with chromatin in untreated MCF10A cells.
However, treatment with ADR or cisplatin is accompanied by a significant increase
and redistribution of RAD6 to DNA, and RAD6, RAD18, PCNA, phosphohistone H3, as
well as p53 proteins are all found in the DNA fractions. These findings suggest
that although RAD6 protein is present in the nucleus, its recruitment to the
chromatin appears to be modulated by DNA damage. Whereas MCF10A cells engineered 
to overexpress ectopic RAD6B are significantly more resistant to ADR and
cisplatin as compared to empty vector-transfected cells, MCF10A cells stably
transfected with antisense RAD6B display hypersensitivity to these
damage-inducing drugs. Analysis of PRR capacities in cisplatin-treated MCF10A
cells stably transfected with empty vector, RAD6B or antisense RAD6B showed that 
whereas RAD6B-overexpressing and vector control MCF10A cells possessed the
ability to convert newly synthesized DNA to higher molecular weight species,
MCF10A cells depleted of RAD6B are PRR-compromised. Although no human diseases
have been linked to mutations in the PRR pathway genes, these data suggest that
RAD6 may play an essential role in DNA damage tolerance and recovery via
modulation of PRR, and that imbalances in the levels of RAD6 could lead to
changes in drug sensitivity and damage-induced mutagenesis.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1207449 
PMID: 14981545  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Acta Biochim Pol. 2003;50(4):909-20.

Effects of distortions by A-tracts of promoter B-DNA spacer region on the
kinetics of open complex formation by Escherichia coli RNA polymerase.

Kolasa IK(1), Łoziński T, Wierzchowski KL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences,
Warszawa, Poland.

A-tracts in DNA due to their structural morphology distinctly different from the 
canonical B-DNA form play an important role in specific recognition of bacterial 
upstream promoter elements by the carboxyl terminal domain of RNA polymerase
alpha subunit and, in turn, in the process of transcription initiation. They are 
only rarely found in the spacer promoter regions separating the -35 and -10
recognition hexamers. At present, the nature of the protein-DNA contacts formed
between RNA polymerase and promoter DNA in transcription initiation can only be
inferred from low resolution structural data and mutational and crosslinking
experiments. To probe these contacts further, we constructed derivatives of a
model Pa promoter bearing in the spacer region one or two An (n = 5 or 6) tracts,
in phase with the DNA helical repeat, and studied the effects of thereby induced 
perturbation of promoter DNA structure on the kinetics of open complex (RPo)
formation in vitro by Escherichia coli RNA polymerase. We found that the overall 
second-order rate constant ka of RPo formation, relative to that at the control
promoter, was strongly reduced by one to two orders of magnitude only when the
A-tracts were located in the nontemplate strand. A particularly strong 30-fold
down effect on ka was exerted by nontemplate A-tracts in the -10 extended
promoter region, where an involvement of nontemplate TG (-14, -15) sequence in a 
specific interaction with region 3 of sigma-subunit is postulated. A-tracts in
the latter location caused also 3-fold slower isomerization of the first closed
transcription complex into the intermediate one that precedes formation of RPo,
and led to two-fold faster dissociation of the latter. All these findings are
discussed in relation to recent structural and kinetic models of RPo formation.

DOI: 035004909 
PMID: 14739986  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Virus Res. 2004 Jan;99(1):69-80.

Simian retrovirus serogroup 2 constitutive transport element recognizes the
ribosomal L10-like protein and translocon gamma subunit-like protein in a yeast
three-hybrid assay.

Li B(1), Li X, Bai Y, Hou JJ, Ma M, Machida CA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Molecular Genetics, Munroe-Meyer Institute, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198, USA.

The simian retrovirus (SRV) serogroup 2 genome contains a constitutive transport 
element (CTE) within its 3' intergenic region (IR) that mediates the nuclear
export of unspliced SRV RNA. In a previous report [Virology 264 (1999) 37], CTE
RNA-protein complexes were detected using UV-crosslinking/sodium dodecyl sulfate 
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). To identify these CTE-interacting 
cellular proteins, we utilized yeast three-hybrid interaction approaches using
the complete IR as bait, modified to eliminate transcriptional termination
signals recognized by RNA polymerase III, and identified several interactive
clones from a Hela cell cDNA activation domain (AD) library. UV-crosslinking of
RNA-protein complexes, using Hela cell extracts and the modified IR bait, were
conducted prior to library screening, to verify appropriate interaction of CTE
RNA-protein complexes. Over one million recombinants were screened, and our yeast
hybrid results indicate that the CTE interacts with several molecules involved in
cellular translational and translocation machinery, including the ribosomal
L10-like protein and the tranlocon protein gamma subunit-like protein.
UV-crosslinking/immunoblot assays have verified the interaction of the CTE region
with molecules immunologically reactive to antibodies recognizing the ribosomal
L10-like protein.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2003.10.008 
PMID: 14687949  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Dec 23;100(26):15566-71. Epub 2003 Dec 12.

The kinesin KIF17b and RNA-binding protein TB-RBP transport specific
cAMP-responsive element modulator-regulated mRNAs in male germ cells.

Chennathukuzhi V(1), Morales CR, El-Alfy M, Hecht NB.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Research on Reproduction and Women's Health, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6142, USA.

Testis brain RNA-binding protein (TB-RBP), the mouse orthologue of the human
protein Translin, is a widely expressed and highly conserved protein with
proposed functions in chromosomal translocations, mitotic cell division, and mRNA
transport, stabilization, and storage. Targeted inactivation of TB-RBP leads to
abnormalities in fertility and behavior. A testis-enriched kinesin KIF17b
coimmunoprecipitates with TB-RBP in a RNA-protein complex containing specific
cAMP-responsive element modulator (CREM)-regulated mRNAs. The specificity of this
interaction is confirmed by in vivo RNA-protein crosslinking and transfections of
hippocampal neurons. Combining in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry at 
the electron microscope level, a temporally sequential dissociation of KIF17b and
TB-RBP from specific mRNAs is detected with TB-RBP release coincident with the
time of mRNA translation, indicating a separation of the processes of transport
and translation. We conclude that KIF17b serves as a molecular motor component of
a TB-RBP-mouse ribonucleoprotein complex transporting a group of specific
CREM-regulated mRNAs in mammalian male postmeiotic germ cells. Because KIF17b has
been reported to control CREM-dependent transcription in male germ cells by
regulating the intracellular location of the transcriptional coactivator
activator of CREM in testis, this indicates that one kinesin links the processes 
of transcription and transport of specific mRNAs in mammalian male germ cells.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2536695100 
PMCID: PMC307608
PMID: 14673085  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Dec 23;100(26):15469-74. Epub 2003 Dec 10.

Donation of catalytic residues to RNA polymerase active center by transcription
factor Gre.

Sosunova E(1), Sosunov V, Kozlov M, Nikiforov V, Goldfarb A, Mustaev A.

Author information: 
(1)Public Health Research Institute, 225 Warren Street, Newark, NJ 07103, USA.

During transcription elongation, RNA polymerase (RNAP) occasionally loses its
grip on the growing RNA end and backtracks on the DNA template. Prokaryotic Gre
factors rescue the backtracked ternary elongating complex through stimulation of 
an intrinsic endonuclease activity, which removes the disengaged 3' RNA segment. 
By using RNA-protein crosslinking in defined ternary elongating complexes,
site-directed mutagenesis, discriminative biochemical assays, and docking of the 
two protein structures, we show that Gre acts by providing two carboxylate
residues for coordination of catalytic Mg2+ ion in the RNAP active center. A
similar mechanism is suggested for the functionally analogous eukaryotic SII
factor. The results expand the general two-metal model of RNAP catalytic
mechanism whereby one of the Mg2+ ions is permanently retained, whereas the other
is recruited ad hoc by an auxiliary factor.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2536698100 
PMCID: PMC307591
PMID: 14668436  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


245. J Biol Chem. 2004 Feb 6;279(6):3893-9. Epub 2003 Nov 6.

Disruption of the zinc finger motifs in the Leishmania tarentolae LC-4 (=TbMP63) 
L-complex editing protein affects the stability of the L-complex.

Kang X(1), Falick AM, Nelson RE, Gao G, Rogers K, Aphasizhev R, Simpson L.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

The uridine insertion/deletion editing complex, which we have termed the
L-complex, is composed of at least 16 polypeptides stabilized entirely by
protein-protein interactions. Three L-complex proteins contain zinc finger motifs
that could be involved in these interactions. In Leishmania these proteins are
labeled LC-1, LC-4, and LC-7b, and the orthologs in Trypanosoma brucei are
labeled MP81, MP63, and MP42. Overexpression of TAP-tagged LC-4 in Leishmania
tarentolae led to a partial localization of the protein in the L-complex together
with the endogenous LC-4 protein, suggesting at least a dimeric organization.
Disruption of zinc fingers 1 or 2 (ZnF-1 and ZnF-2) in the tagged LC-4 protein
was performed by mutation of the two zinc-binding cysteines to glycines.
Disruption of ZnF-1 led to a partial growth defect and a substantive breakdown of
the L-complex, whereas disruption of ZnF-2 had no effect on cell growth and
caused a partial breakdown of the L-complex. A close interaction of LC-4 with 2-4
proteins, including REL1 (RNA ligase) and LC-3, was suggested by chemical
crosslinking and co-immunoprecipitation experiments. Our results suggest that
both ZnF-1 and ZnF-2 in LC-4 play a role in protein-protein interactions and
indicate that the LC-4 subcomplex may be required for formation or stability of
the entire L-complex.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M310185200 
PMID: 14604987  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


246. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jan 23;279(4):2825-31. Epub 2003 Nov 3.

Transcription factor B contacts promoter DNA near the transcription start site of
the archaeal transcription initiation complex.

Renfrow MB(1), Naryshkin N, Lewis LM, Chen HT, Ebright RH, Scott RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Georgia,
Athens, Georgia 30602-2256, USA.

Transcription initiation in all three domains of life requires the assembly of
large multiprotein complexes at DNA promoters before RNA polymerase
(RNAP)-catalyzed transcript synthesis. Core RNAP subunits show homology among the
three domains of life, and recent structural information supports this homology. 
General transcription factors are required for productive transcription
initiation complex formation. The archaeal general transcription factors
TATA-element-binding protein (TBP), which mediates promoter recognition, and
transcription factor B (TFB), which mediates recruitment of RNAP, show extensive 
homology to eukaryal TBP and TFIIB. Crystallographic information is becoming
available for fragments of transcription initiation complexes (e.g. RNAP,
TBP-TFB-DNA, TBP-TFIIB-DNA), but understanding the molecular topography of
complete initiation complexes still requires biochemical and biophysical
characterization of protein-protein and protein-DNA interactions. In published
work, systematic site-specific protein-DNA photocrosslinking has been used to
define positions of RNAP subunits and general transcription factors in bacterial 
and eukaryal initiation complexes. In this work, we have used systematic
site-specific protein-DNA photocrosslinking to define positions of RNAP subunits 
and general transcription factors in an archaeal initiation complex. Employing a 
set of 41 derivatized DNA fragments, each having a phenyl azide photoactivable
crosslinking agent incorporated at a single, defined site within positions -40 to
+1 of the gdh promoter of the hyperthermophilic marine archaea, Pyrococcus
furiosus (Pf), we have determined the locations of PfRNAP subunits PfTBP and
PfTFB relative to promoter DNA. The resulting topographical information supports 
the striking homology with the eukaryal initiation complex and permits one major 
new conclusion, which is that PfTFB interacts with promoter DNA not only in the
TATA-element region but also in the transcription-bubble region, near the
transcription start site. Comparison with crystallographic information implicates
the PfTFB N-terminal domain in the interaction with the transcription-bubble
region. The results are discussed in relation to the known effects of
substitutions in the TFB and TFIIB N-terminal domains on transcription initiation
and transcription start-site selection.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M311433200 
PMID: 14597623  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Oncogene. 2003 Sep 11;22(39):8012-20.

Members of the poly (rC) binding protein family stimulate the activity of the
c-myc internal ribosome entry segment in vitro and in vivo.

Evans JR(1), Mitchell SA, Spriggs KA, Ostrowski J, Bomsztyk K, Ostarek D, Willis 
AE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Leicester, University Road,
Leicester, LE1 7RH, UK.

The 5' untranslated region of the proto-oncogene c-myc contains an internal
ribosome entry segment and c-Myc translation can be initiated by cap-independent 
as well as cap-dependent mechanisms. In contrast to the process of cap-dependent 
initiation, the trans-acting factor requirements for cellular internal ribosome
entry are poorly understood. Here, we show that members of the poly (rC) binding 
protein family, poly (rC) binding protein 1 (PCBP1), poly (rC) binding protein 2 
(PCBP2) and hnRNPK were able to activate the IRES in vitro up to threefold when
added in combination with upstream of N-ras and unr-interacting protein. The
interactions of PCBP1, PCBP2 and hnRNPK with c-myc-IRES-RNA were shown to be
specific by ultraviolet crosslinking analysis and electrophoretic mobility shift 
assays, while immunoprecipitation of the three proteins using specific antibodies
followed by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction showed that they were
able to bind c-myc mRNA. c-myc-IRES-mediated translation from the reporter vector
was stimulated by cotransfection of plasmids encoding PCBP1, PCBP2 and hnRNPK.
Interestingly, the mutated version of the c-myc IRES that is prevalent in
patients with multiple myeloma bound hnRNPK more efficiently in vitro and was
stimulated by hnRNPK to a greater extent in vivo.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1206645 
PMID: 12970749  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Mol Cell. 2003 Jul;12(1):157-65.

DNA binding and ToxR responsiveness by the wing domain of TcpP, an activator of
virulence gene expression in Vibrio cholerae.

Krukonis ES(1), DiRita VJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Virulence in Vibrio cholerae requires activation of toxT by two
membrane-localized activators, TcpP and ToxR. We isolated 12 tcpP activation
mutants that fell into two classes: class I mutants were inactive irrespective of
the presence of ToxR, and class II mutants exhibited near wild-type activity when
coexpressed with ToxR. Most class I mutants had lesions in the wing domain
predicted by homology with the winged helix-turn-helix family of activators.
Class I mutants bound promoter DNA poorly and were largely unable to interact
with ToxR in a crosslinking assay, whereas class II mutants retained physical
interaction with ToxR. One mutant constructed in vitro bound DNA poorly but
nevertheless responded to ToxR by activating toxT and also maintained ToxR
interaction. We propose that ToxR interaction, but not DNA binding, is essential 
for TcpP function and that the wing domain of TcpP enables contact with ToxR
required for productive TcpP-RNA polymerase association.

DOI: 10.1016/s1097-2765(03)00222-3 
PMID: 12887901  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Photochem Photobiol Sci. 2003 Jun;2(6):688-93.

Action spectra for UV-light induced RNA-RNA crosslinking in 16S ribosomal RNA in 
the ribosome.

Zhirnov OV(1), Wollenzien P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Structural Biochemistry, North Carolina State
University, Raleigh, NC 27695, USA.

UV irradiation induces intramolecular crosslinks in ribosomal RNA in the
ribosome. These crosslinks occur between nucleotides distant in primary sequence 
and they are specific, limited in number and have crosslinking efficiencies
sufficient to allow their use in monitoring conformational changes. In this work,
the frequency of crosslinking for eight 16S rRNA crosslinks was determined as a
function of wavelength of irradiation. For six of the crosslinks, the action
spectra correspond to the absorption spectra of at least one of the participating
nucleotides. For a crosslink between nucleotides C967 and C1400 the maximum
frequency of crosslinking occurs at wavelengths blue-shifted from the absorbance 
maximum of cytidine and for a crosslink between C1402 and C1501 the maximum
frequency of crosslinking is red-shifted. Photoreversal of the crosslinks was
also studied by deproteinizing crosslinked RNA under mild conditions and then
re-irradiating it with specific wavelengths under conditions in which the
crosslinks were reversed but not formed. The different crosslinks exhibit
significantly different extents of photoreversal versus wavelength profiles. The 
differences in the crosslinking action spectra can be accounted for in the
absorbance spectra of the nucleotides that are involved in the crosslink as well 
as by the photoreversal action spectra.


PMID: 12859155  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 May 27;100(11):6364-9. Epub 2003 May 15.

Genomewide demarcation of RNA polymerase II transcription units revealed by
physical fractionation of chromatin.

Nagy PL(1), Cleary ML, Brown PO, Lieb JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University, CA 94305-5428, USA.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Oct 10;103(41):15273.

Epigenetic modifications of chromatin serve an important role in regulating the
expression and accessibility of genomic DNA. We report here a genomewide approach
for fractionating yeast chromatin into two functionally distinct parts, one
containing RNA polymerase II transcribed sequences, and the other comprising
noncoding sequences and genes transcribed by RNA polymerases I and III. Noncoding
regions could be further fractionated into promoters and segments lacking
promoters. The observed separations were apparently based on differential
crosslinking efficiency of chromatin in different genomic regions. The results
reveal a genomewide molecular mechanism for marking promoters and genomic regions
that have a license to be transcribed by RNA polymerase II, a previously
unrecognized level of genomic complexity that may exist in all eukaryotes. Our
approach has broad potential use as a tool for genome annotation and for the
characterization of global changes in chromatin structure that accompany
different genetic, environmental, and disease states.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1131966100 
PMCID: PMC164452
PMID: 12750471  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 May 15;31(10):2475-82.

The histone 3 lysine 36 methyltransferase, SET2, is involved in transcriptional
elongation.

Schaft D(1), Roguev A, Kotovic KM, Shevchenko A, Sarov M, Shevchenko A,
Neugebauer KM, Stewart AF.

Author information: 
(1)BIOTEC, Technische Universitaet Dresden, MPI-CBG, Pfotenhauerstrasse 108,
D-01307, Germany.

Existing evidence indicates that SET2, the histone 3 lysine 36 methyltransferase 
of Saccharomyces cerevisiae, is a transcriptional repressor. Here we show by five
main lines of evidence that SET2 is involved in transcriptional elongation.
First, most, if not all, subunits of the RNAP II holoenzyme co-purify with SET2. 
Second, all of the co-purifying RNAP II subunit, RPO21, was phosphorylated at
serines 5 and 2 of the C-terminal domain (CTD) tail, indicating that the SET2
association is specific to either the elongating or SSN3 repressed forms (or
both) of RNAP II. Third, the association of SET2 with CTD phosphorylated RPO21
remained in the absence of ssn3. Fourth, in the absence of ssn3, mRNA production 
from gal1 required SET2. Fifth, SET2 was detected on gal1 by in vivo crosslinking
after, but not before, the induction of transcription. Similarly, SET2 physically
associated with the transcribed region of pdr5 but was not detected on gal1 or
pdr5 promoter regions. Since SET2 is also a histone methyltransferase, these
results suggest a role for histone 3 lysine 36 methylation in transcriptional
elongation.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkg372 
PMCID: PMC156053
PMID: 12736296  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Feb 15;31(4):1208-15.

DNA crosslinking and biological activity of a hairpin polyamide-chlorambucil
conjugate.

Wang YD(1), Dziegielewski J, Wurtz NR, Dziegielewska B, Dervan PB, Beerman TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Roswell Park Cancer Institute,
Buffalo, NY 14263, USA.

A prototype of a novel class of DNA alkylating agents, which combines the DNA
crosslinking moiety chlorambucil (Chl) with a sequence-selective hairpin
pyrrole-imidazole polyamide ImPy-beta-ImPy-gamma-ImPy-beta-Dp (polyamide 1), was 
evaluated for its ability to damage DNA and induce biological responses.
Polyamide 1-Chl conjugate (1-Chl) alkylates and interstrand crosslinks DNA in
cell-free systems. The alkylation occurs predominantly at 5'-AGCTGCA-3' sequence,
which represents the polyamide binding site. Conjugate-induced lesions were first
detected on DNA treated for 1 h with 0.1 micro M 1-Chl, indicating that the
conjugate is at least 100-fold more potent than Chl. Prolonged incubation allowed
for DNA damage detection even at 0.01 micro M concentration. Treatment with 1-Chl
decreased DNA template activity in simian virus 40 (SV40) in vitro replication
assays. 1-Chl inhibited mammalian cell growth, genomic DNA replication and cell
cycle progression, and arrested cells in the G2/M phase. Moreover, cellular
effects were observed at 1-Chl concentrations similar to those needed for DNA
damage in cell-free systems. Neither of the parent compounds, unconjugated Chl or
polyamide 1, demonstrated any cellular activity in the same concentration range. 
The conjugate molecule 1-Chl possesses the sequence-selectivity of a polyamide
and the enhanced DNA reactivity of Chl.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkg215 
PMCID: PMC150233
PMID: 12582240  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Neuron. 2003 Feb 6;37(3):417-31.

RNA cargoes associating with FMRP reveal deficits in cellular functioning in Fmr1
null mice.

Miyashiro KY(1), Beckel-Mitchener A, Purk TP, Becker KG, Barret T, Liu L,
Carbonetto S, Weiler IJ, Greenough WT, Eberwine J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Department of Psychiatry, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The Fragile X mental retardation-1 (Fmr1) gene encodes a multifunctional protein,
FMRP, with intrinsic RNA binding activity. We have developed an approach,
antibody-positioned RNA amplification (APRA), to identify the RNA cargoes
associated with the in vivo configured FMRP messenger ribonucleoprotein (mRNP)
complex. Using APRA as a primary screen, putative FMRP RNA cargoes were assayed
for their ability to bind directly to FMRP using traditional methods of assessing
RNA-protein interactions, including UV-crosslinking and filter binding assays.
Approximately 60% of the APRA-defined mRNAs directly associate with FMRP. By
examining a subset of these mRNAs and their encoded proteins in brain tissue from
Fmr1 knockout mice, we have observed that some of these cargoes as well as the
proteins they encode show discrete changes in abundance and/or differential
subcellular distribution. These data are consistent with spatially selective
regulation of multiple biological pathways by FMRP.

DOI: 10.1016/s0896-6273(03)00034-5 
PMID: 12575950  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


254. BioDrugs. 2003;17(1):66-8.

Amotosalen: Allogeneic Cellular Immunotherapies system, INTERCEPT Plasma System, 
INTERCEPT Platelet System, S 59.

[No authors listed]

Adis CommentsCerus Corporation is developing a variety of pathogen-inactivation
systems, based on its Helinx technology. Three of the systems include amotosalen 
[S 59] as the inactivation compound. Amotosalen is a light-activated, DNA-,
RNA-crosslinking psoralen compound, which is used to neutralise pathogens. The
systems that utilise amotosalen are called the INTERCEPT Platelet System, the
INTERCEPT Plasma System and the Allogeneic Cellular Immunotherapies (ACIT)
system. The INTERCEPT Platelet System and INTERCEPT Plasma System are two of the 
systems that make up Cerus' INTERCEPT Blood Systems. The other system is the
INTERCEPT Red Blood Cell System, which contains S 303 as the inactivation
compound rather than amotosalen. Cerus' Helinx technology is able to prevent
replication of DNA or RNA that is present in pathogens but not in the blood
components being treated (e.g. platelets and plasma). When added to the blood
components, the inactivation agent (in this case amotosalen) crosses the membrane
or cell wall of the pathogen. When activated by light, amotosalen binds to the
nucleic acid of the pathogen and prevents replication. This process prevents
infection. INTERCEPT Platelet System: Cerus developed its INTERCEPT Platelet
System, in collaboration with Baxter Healthcare, for use in blood centres.
Platelets are an essential component of the coagulation process and may be
required by patients undergoing surgery, cancer chemotherapy, transplantation or 
with bleeding disorders. The system is made up of an illuminator device, a
compound absorption device and a processing kit containing amotosalen. In October
2002, the two companies announced that CE Mark approval had been received for the
illuminator device for the INTERCEPT trade mark Blood System. Application of this
technology to platelets is the first to be approved. As it is a new technology,
the system is currently undergoing process validation in accordance with European
Blood Bank GMP requirements. This validation process is currently being conducted
in Denmark, France, Germany, Sweden and the UK. Marketing approval applications
for the INTERCEPT Platelet System have also been submitted in Australia and
Canada. In addition, the regulatory submission process has begun in the US. A
phase III trial (EuroSPRITE) has been conducted in 103 patients in Europe with
pooled random donor platelets. The platelets were collected using the buffy coat 
process. Another two 20-patient clinical trials have also been conducted in
Europe, as well as a 40-patient trial using platelets collected by an apheresis
collection system. Cerus has also conducted a phase III trial (SPRINT) in the US.
The trial was conducted in 671 patients and used platelets collected by Baxter's 
apheresis collection system. INTERCEPT Plasma System: Cerus is also developing
the INTERCEPT Plasma System in collaboration with Baxter Healthcare. The system
also combines amotosalen, an illumination device and a compound absorption
device. The two companies are currently preparing regulatory applications for the
INTERCEPT Plasma System for the US. This application will be followed by a
submission for CE Mark designation in Europe. Patients undergoing surgery, or
transplantation, or with bleeding disorders, may require transfusions of plasma, 
often to control bleeding. The type of plasma is stored in frozen form and is
called fresh frozen plasma (FFP). The INTERCEPT Plasma System is currently in
phase IIIc development in the US. Patient enrolment in the trial is still
ongoing. The trial is comparing INTERCEPT trade mark Plasma System treated versus
untreated FFP in 30 patients with thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura. Allogeneic
Cellular Immunotherapies system: Cerus is also investigating the potential of its
Helinx technology to improve the outcome of bone marrow transplantation
procedures (used to treat leukaemia and lymphoma) through the treatmatment for
many forms of leukaemia and is most effective when the donor is very closely
matched to the patient for the major human leucocyte antigen (HLA) groups. As
part of the transplant procedure, patients receive donor T cells to improve
engraftment of the bone marrow transplant and strengthen the patient's immune
system. However, donor T cells expose the patient to a high risk of contracting
graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) caused by the proliferation of donor T cells,
which attack the patient's healthy tissue. GVHD has a high mortality rate. Cerus'
ACIT system has been developed to decrease the stringency of matching donors to
patients and to inhibit the ability of donor T cells to cause GVHD.
Light-activated amotosalen binds and permanently crosslinks DNA, preventing
replication and thus stopping proliferation of donor T cells. Phase I development
is currently being conducted in this area in the US using amotosalen as the
neutralising agent. Cerus completed a phase I study investigating the safety and 
tolerability of its ACIT system in 2001. The study was conducted in patients
receiving closely matched allogeneic bone marrow transplants for leukaemia. The
company is currently collaborating with the National Marrow Donor Program in
order to conduct further clinical studies in patients receiving bone marrow
transplants from unmatched donors. Cerus has development, manufacturing and
marketing agreements with Baxter covering the INTERCEPT Blood Systems, which
includes the INTERCEPT Platelet system, the INTERCEPT Plasma System, and the
INTERCEPT Red Blood Cell System. Under the terms of the agreements the two
companies usually share the very early development activities. Cerus then
conducts preclinical and clinical trials, while Baxter is responsible for the
development of the systems disposables and devices. Following commercialisation
Cerus will supply amotosalen and Baxter will supply the other components of the
system and market, sell and distribute the system In January 2001, Cereus
announced that it has entered into a collaborative agreement with the
Pharmaceutical Division of Kirin Brewery in Japan to develop and market products 
for stem cell transplantation based on Cerus' proprietary Helinx technology.
Under terms of the agreement, Cerus and Kirin will jointly develop the products. 
Cerus has received an initial license fee of US dollar 1 million. In addition it 
may receive up to US dollar 11 million in future payments upon achievement of
development milestones. Kirin will also fund all development expenses for the
Asia-Pacific region and a portion of Cerus' development activities aimed at
obtaining product approval in the US. Kirin will market the products in the
Asia-Pacific region, including Japan, China, Korea and Australia, and Cerus will 
receive a specified share of product revenues. Cerus will retain marketing rights
in the rest of the world, including the US and Europe.

DOI: 10.2165/00063030-200317010-00006 
PMID: 12534321  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


255. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jan 31;278(5):3357-62. Epub 2002 Nov 12.

Transcription dependence of chromosomal gene targeting by triplex-forming
oligonucleotides.

Macris MA(1), Glazer PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Therapeutic Radiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, Connecticut 06520-8040, USA.

Triplex-forming oligonucleotides (TFOs) recognize and bind to specific DNA
sequences and have been used to modify gene function in cells. To study factors
that might influence triplex formation at chromosomal sites in mammalian cells,
we developed a restriction protection assay to detect triplex-directed psoralen
crosslinks in genomic DNA prepared from TFO-transfected cells. Using this assay, 
we detected binding of a G-rich TFO to a chromosomal site even in the absence of 
transcription when high concentrations of the TFO were used for transfection.
However, experimental induction of transcription at the target site, via an
ecdysone-responsive promoter, resulted in substantial increases (3-fold or more) 
in target site crosslinking, especially at low TFO concentrations. When RNA
polymerase activity was inhibited, even in the ecdysone-induced cells, the level 
of TFO binding was significantly decreased, indicating that transcription through
the target region, and not just transcription factor binding, is necessary for
the enhanced chromosomal targeting by TFOs. These findings provide evidence that 
physiologic activity at a chromosomal target site can influence its accessibility
to TFOs and suggest that gene targeting by small molecules may be most effective 
at highly expressed chromosomal loci.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M206542200 
PMID: 12431993  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


256. J Neurosci Res. 2002 Jul 15;69(2):178-88.

H(2)O(2) induces upregulation of Fas and Fas ligand expression in
NGF-differentiated PC12 cells: modulation by cAMP.

Facchinetti F(1), Furegato S, Terrazzino S, Leon A.

Author information: 
(1)Research and Innovation Company, Padova, Italy.
facchinetti@researchinnovation.com

Fas, (APO-1/CD95), a transmembrane glycoprotein belonging to the tumor necrosis
(TNF) receptor superfamily, transduces apoptotic death upon crosslinking by its
cognate ligand (FasL). As upregulation of Fas/FasL expression occurs in
neuropathological conditions (e.g., stroke, central nervous system [CNS] trauma
and seizures) associated with oxidative damage, we questioned whether reactive
oxygen species (ROS) can directly affect Fas and FasL expression in neuronal
cells. Utilizing rat PC12 cells neuronally differentiated with nerve growth
factor (NGF), we observed that concentrations of H(2)O(2) inducing apoptotic cell
death rapidly trigger the expression of Fas mRNA and protein as well as FasL
mRNA. Although NGF-addition to naive PC12 downregulated constitutive Fas and FasL
transcription, the H(2)O(2)-induced Fas and FasL mRNA upregulation invariably
occurred either in the presence or in the absence of NGF. Similarly, phorbol
1,2-myristate 1, 3-acetate (PMA), a potent protein kinase C (PKC) activator, did 
not modify Fas and FasL mRNA upregulation subsequent to H(2)O(2) exposure. On the
contrary, forskolin and dibutyryl cAMP, which elevate intracellular cAMP by
independent mechanisms, both counteracted H(2)O(2)-induced Fas, but not FasL,
mRNA upregulation and increased constitutive expression of FasL mRNA. Altogether,
our data show that oxidative stress is a major stimulus in eliciting Fas and FasL
expression in NGF-differentiated PC12 cells. Moreover, we describe here for the
first time the existence of cAMP-dependent mechanism(s) modulating Fas and FasL
expression.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jnr.10295 
PMID: 12111799  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Biomaterials. 2002 Aug;23(15):3183-92.

Crosslinked type II collagen matrices: preparation, characterization, and
potential for cartilage engineering.

Pieper JS(1), van der Kraan PM, Hafmans T, Kamp J, Buma P, van Susante JL, van
den Berg WB, Veerkamp JH, van Kuppevelt TH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University Medical Centre Nijmegen, NCMLS, The
Netherlands.

The limited intrinsic repair capacity of articular cartilage has stimulated
continuing efforts to develop tissue engineered analogues. Matrices composed of
type II collagen and chondroitin sulfate (CS), the major constituents of hyaline 
cartilage, may create an appropriate environment for the generation of
cartilage-like tissue. In this study, we prepared, characterized, and evaluated
type 11 collagen matrices with and without CS. Type II collagen matrices were
prepared using purified, pepsin-treated, type II collagen. Techniques applied to 
prepare type I collagen matrices were found unsuitable for type II collagen.
Crosslinking of collagen and covalent attachment of CS was performed using
1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethyl aminopropyl)carbodiimide. Porous matrices were prepared by 
freezing and lyophilization, and their physico-chemical characteristics (degree
of crosslinking, denaturing temperature, collagenase-resistance, amount of CS
incorporated) established. Matrices were evaluated for their capacity to sustain 
chondrocyte proliferation and differentiation in vitro. After 7 d of culture,
chondrocytes were mainly located at the periphery of the matrices. In contrast to
type I collagen, type II collagen supported the distribution of cells throughout 
the matrix. After 14 d of culture, matrices were surfaced with a
cartilagenous-like layer, and occasionally clusters of chondrocytes were present 
inside the matrix. Chondrocytes proliferated and differentiated as indicated by
biochemical analyses, ultrastructural observations, and reverse transcriptase PCR
for collagen types I, II and X. No major differences were observed with respect
to the presence or absence of CS in the matrices.

DOI: 10.1016/s0142-9612(02)00067-4 
PMID: 12102190  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


258. RNA. 2002 Jun;8(6):816-23.

Probing FinO-FinP RNA interactions by site-directed protein-RNA crosslinking and 
gelFRET.

Ghetu AF(1), Arthur DC, Kerppola TK, Glover JN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.

The conjugative transfer of F-plasmids is repressed by a two-component system,
which consists of the antisense RNA FinP and the protein FinO. FinO binds FinP,
protecting it from endonucleolytic degradation and facilitating duplex formation 
between FinP and its complementary RNA. Here we present the results of
site-specific protein-RNA cross-linking and gel-based fluorescence resonance
energy transfer (gelFRET) experiments used to probe the structure of a complex of
FinO bound to an RNA target consisting of a duplex with 5' and 3' single-stranded
tails. The crosslinking experiments reveal that an extensive, largely positively 
charged surface on FinO contacts RNA. The gelFRET measurements indicate that the 
5' single-stranded tail of the RNA is in closer contact with much of the protein 
than the distal, blunt end of the RNA duplex. These data suggest that significant
conformational adjustments in the protein and/or the RNA accompany complex
formation.

DOI: 10.1017/s1355838202026730 
PMCID: PMC1370299
PMID: 12088153  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


259. RNA. 2002 Mar;8(3):279-89.

Mining biochemical information: lessons taught by the ribosome.

Whirl-Carrillo M(1), Gabashvili IS, Bada M, Banatao DR, Altman RB.

Author information: 
(1)Stanford Medical Informatics, Stanford University, California 94305-5479, USA.

The publication of the crystal structures of the ribosome offers an opportunity
to retrospectively evaluate the information content of hundreds of qualitative
biochemical and biophysical studies of these structures. We assessed the
correspondence between more than 2,500 experimental proximity measurements and
the distances observed in the ribosomal crystals. Although detailed experimental 
procedures and protocols are unique in almost each analyzed paper, the data can
be grouped into subsets with similar patterns and analyzed in an integrative
fashion. We found that, for crosslinking, footprinting, and cleavage data, the
corresponding distances observed in crystal structures generally did not exceed
the maximum values expected (from the estimated length of the agent and maximal
anticipated deviations from the conformations found in crystals). However, the
distribution of distances had heavier tails than those typically assumed when
building three-dimensional models, and the fraction of incompatible distances was
greater than expected. Some of these incompatibilities can be attributed to the
experimental methods used. In addition, the accuracy of these procedures appears 
to be sensitive to the different reactivities, flexibilities, and interactions
among the components. These findings demonstrate the necessity of a very careful 
analysis of data used for structural modeling and consideration of all possible
parameters that could potentially influence the quality of measurements. We
conclude that experimental proximity measurements can provide useful distance
information for structural modeling, but with a broad distribution of inferred
distance ranges. We also conclude that development of automated modeling
approaches would benefit from better annotations of experimental data for
detection and interpretation of their significance.

DOI: 10.1017/s135583820202407x 
PMCID: PMC1370250
PMID: 12003488  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002 Mar 1;30(5):1224-32.

Homologous recombination is essential for RAD51 up-regulation in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae following DNA crosslinking damage.

Cohen Y(1), Dardalhon M, Averbeck D.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Curie, Section de Recherche, UMR 2027 CNRS/IC, LRC-28V du CEA, Centre
Universitaire Paris-Sud, Bât. 110, F-91405 Orsay, France.

We have determined the kinetics of up-regulation of the homologous recombination 
gene RAD51, one of the genes induced following DNA damage in isogenic haploid DNA
repair-deficient mutants of Saccharomyces cerevisiae, using treatment with the
DNA crosslinking agent 8-methoxypsoralen. We show that RAD51 is up-regulated
concomitantly, although independently, with a shift from the G1 cell cycle phase 
to G2/M arrest. This up-regulation is absent in homologous recombination
repair-deficient mutants and increased in mutants deficient in nucleotide
excision repair and pol(zeta)-dependent translesion synthesis. We demonstrate
that the Rad53-dependent DNA damage signal transduction cascade is active in
RAD51 non-inducing mutants. However, when independently eliminated, it too
abolishes RAD51 up-regulation. We present a model in which RAD51 up-regulation
requires two signals: one depending on the Rad53-dependent DNA damage signal
transduction cascade and the other on homologous recombination repair.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/30.5.1224 
PMCID: PMC101242
PMID: 11861915  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Methods. 2001 Nov;25(3):333-43.

Short-range RNA-RNA crosslinking methods to determine rRNA structure and
interactions.

Juzumiene D(1), Shapkina T, Kirillov S, Wollenzien P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Structural Biochemistry, North Carolina State
University, 126 Polk Hall, Raleigh, North Carolina 27695, USA.

We describe details of procedures to analyze RNA-RNA crosslinks made by far-UV
irradiation (< 300 nm) or made by irradiation with near-UV light (320-365 nm) on 
RNA containing photosensitive nucleotides, in the present case containing
4-thiouridine. Zero-length crosslinks of these types must occur because of the
close proximity of the participants through either specific interactions or
transient contacts in the folded RNA structure, so they are valuable monitors of 
the conformation of the RNA. Procedures to produce crosslinks in the 16S
ribosomal RNA and between the 16S rRNA and mRNA or tRNA are described. Gel
electrophoresis conditions are described that separate the products according to 
their structure to allow the determination of the number and frequency of the
crosslinking products. Gel electrophoresis together with an ultracentrifugation
procedure for the efficient recovery of RNA from the polyacrylamide gels allows
the purification of molecules containing different crosslinks. These separation
techniques allow the analysis of the sites of crosslinking by primer extension
and RNA sequencing techniques. The procedures are applicable to other types of
RNA molecules with some differences to control levels of crosslinking and
separation conditions.

Copyright 2001 Elsevier Science (USA).

DOI: 10.1006/meth.2001.1245 
PMID: 11860287  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Nucleic Acids Res. 2001 Dec 15;29(24):5216-25.

The trypanosome homolog of human p32 interacts with RBP16 and stimulates its gRNA
binding activity.

Hayman ML(1), Miller MM, Chandler DM, Goulah CC, Read LK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Witebsky Center for Microbial Pathogenesis and 
Immunology, SUNY Buffalo School of Medicine, 138 Farber Hall, Buffalo, NY 14214, 
USA.

RBP16 is a guide RNA (gRNA)-binding protein that was shown through
immunoprecipitation experiments to interact with approximately 30% of total gRNAs
in Trypanosoma brucei mitochondria. To gain insight into the biochemical function
of RBP16, we used affinity chromatography and immunoprecipitation to identify
RBP16 protein binding partners. By these methods, RBP16 does not appear to stably
interact with the core editing machinery. However, fractionation of mitochondrial
extracts on MBP-RBP16 affinity columns consistently isolated proteins of 12, 16, 
18 and 22 kDa that were absent from MBP control columns. We describe here our
analysis of one RBP16-associated protein, p22. The predicted p22 protein has
significant sequence similarity to a family of multimeric, acidic proteins that
includes human p32 and Saccharomyces cerevisiae mam33p. Glutaraldehyde
crosslinking of recombinant p22 identified homo-multimeric forms of the protein, 
further substantiating its homology to p32. We confirmed the p22-RBP16
interaction and demonstrated that the two proteins bind each other directly by
ELISA utilizing recombinant p22 and RBP16. p32 family members have been reported 
to modulate viral and cellular pre-mRNA splicing, in some cases by perturbing
interaction of their binding partners with RNA. To determine whether p22
similarly affects the gRNA binding properties of RBP16, we titrated recombinant
p22 into UV crosslinking assays. These experiments revealed that p22
significantly stimulates the gRNA binding capacity of RBP16. Thus, p22 has the
potential to be a regulatory factor in T.brucei mitochondrial gene expression by 
modulating the RNA binding properties of RBP16.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/29.24.5216 
PMCID: PMC97595
PMID: 11812855  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Jan 22;99(2):649-54. Epub 2002 Jan 8.

Transcription-coupled repair in RNA polymerase I-transcribed genes of yeast.

Conconi A(1), Bespalov VA, Smerdon MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry and Biophysics, School of Molecular Biosciences, Washington State
University, Pullman, WA 99164-4660, USA.

Nucleotide excision repair (NER) of UV-induced cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers
(CPDs) was measured in the individual strands of transcriptionally active and
inactive ribosomal genes of yeast. Ribosomal genes (rDNA) are present in multiple
copies, but only a fraction of them is actively transcribed. Restriction enzyme
digestion was used to specifically release the transcriptionally active fraction 
from yeast nuclei, and selective psoralen crosslinking was used to distinguish
between active and inactive rDNA chromatin. Removal of CPDs was followed in both 
rDNA populations, and the data clearly show that strand-specific repair occurs in
transcriptionally active rDNA while being absent in the inactive rDNA fraction.
Thus, transcription-coupled repair occurs in RNA polymerase I-transcribed genes
in yeast. Moreover, the nontranscribed strand of active rDNA is repaired faster
than either strand of inactive rDNA, implying that NER has preferred access to
the active, non-nucleosomal rDNA chromatin. Finally, restriction enzyme
accessibility to active rDNA varies during NER, suggesting that there is a change
in ribosomal gene chromatin structure during or soon after CPD removal.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.022373099 
PMCID: PMC117360
PMID: 11782531  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


264. RNA. 2001 Dec;7(12):1803-16.

Interactions of mRNAs and gRNAs involved in trypanosome mitochondrial RNA
editing: structure probing of an mRNA bound to its cognate gRNA.

Leung SS(1), Koslowsky DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Interdepartmental Graduate Program in Genetics, Michigan State University,
East Lansing 48824, USA.

Posttranscriptional editing of trypanosome mitochondrial messenger RNA is
directed by small guide RNAs (gRNAs). Using crosslinking techniques, we have
previously shown that the gRNA base pairs to the mRNA via a 5' anchor, whereas
its 3' U-tail interacts with upstream purine-rich mRNA sequences. The
incorporation of crosslinking data into RNA folding programs produced similar
structure predictions for all gRNA/mRNA pairs examined. This suggests that
gRNA/mRNA pairs can form common secondary structure motifs that may be important 
for recognition by the editing complex. In this study, the structure of CYb mRNA 
crosslinked to gCYb-558 was examined using solution-probing techniques. The
mRNA/gRNA crosslinked molecules are efficient substrates for gRNA-directed
cleavage. In addition, when the cleavage assay is performed in the presence or
absence of additional UTP, the activities of both the U-specific exonuclease and 
terminal uridylyl transferase (tutase) can be detected. These results indicate
that a partial editing complex can assemble and function on these substrates
suggesting that the crosslink captured the molecules in a biologically relevant
interaction. The structure probing data directly show that the U-tail protects
several mRNA bases predicted to be involved in the U-tail-mRNA duplex. In
combination with our previous studies, these new data provide additional support 
for the predicted secondary structure of interacting gRNA/mRNA pairs.


PMCID: PMC1370219
PMID: 11780636  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Neurochem Int. 2002 Jan;40(1):69-78.

Protein crosslinking, tissue transglutaminase, alternative splicing and
neurodegeneration.

Citron BA(1), Suo Z, SantaCruz K, Davies PJ, Qin F, Festoff BW.

Author information: 
(1)Neurobiology Research Laboratory, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 4801
Linwood Boulevard, Kansas City, MO 64128, USA.

Increasing interest and awareness of protein aggregation as being implicated in
neurodegenerative processes has developed in recent years. One novel mechanism
for this may be transglutaminase (TGase)-mediated protein crosslinking, that is
involved in a variety of natural processes ranging from the stabilization of
fibrin clots to production of the epidermal cell envelope and the fluid barrier
of the skin. TGases are also implicated in both function and dysfunction of the
central (CNS) and peripheral (PNS) nervous systems. The most ubiquitously
expressed member of the TGase family, known as tissue TGase (tTG) or TG2, which, 
in addition to catalyzing the production of epsilon-lysine to gamma-glutaminyl
isodipeptide bonds, serves a dual function as the G-protein Galpha(h) and is both
expressed and active in PNS and CNS. It differs from other members of the TGase
gene family in this regard and may implicate it in 'switches' from life or
trophic signaling to those associated with apoptosis. In this regard, recent data
indicate that one or more TGases are involved in neurodegenerative disorders such
as the Qn/CAG repeat disorders, as well as Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases. 
As do many genes, particularly those highly expressed in the CNS, tTG undergoes
alternative processing. Elevated expression and alternative splicing, resulting
in a short (S) isoform of tTG with more active crosslinking activity, are
associated with increased neuronal loss in affected regions in the demented
brain. Our recent and novel data indicate that tTG mRNA, protein, and TGase
activity are elevated in certain neurodegenerative diseases, and are accompanied 
by transcription of this S splice variant that results in unregulated
crosslinking, unique to neurodegenerative disorders.

DOI: 10.1016/s0197-0186(01)00062-6 
PMID: 11738473  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Nucleic Acids Res. 2001 Oct 1;29(19):3919-27.

Characterisation of PAUSE-1, a powerful silencer in the human plasminogen
activator inhibitor type 2 gene promoter.

Ogbourne SM(1), Antalis TM.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Metastasis Laboratory, Queensland Cancer Fund Experimental Oncology
Program, University of Queensland, 4029 Queensland, Australia.

Plasminogen activator inhibitor type 2 (PAI-2) is a serine protease inhibitor
traditionally regarded as a regulator of fibrinolysis and extracellular matrix
degradation. More recently, PAI-2 has been implicated in diverse processes such
as keratinocyte differentiation, cell death and viral pathogenesis. The PAI-2
promoter tightly regulates PAI-2 gene expression in a cell-specific manner and
this control is mediated, in part, by the upstream silencer element, PAUSE-1.
Here we have defined PAUSE-1 and investigated its activity as a silencer. A
series of mutations were generated within the PAUSE-1 element and analysed for
transcription factor binding and transcriptional silencing activity. These
studies have defined the minimal functional PAUSE-1 element as
TCTN(x)AGAN(3)T(4), where x = 0, 2 or 4. Examination of related elements present 
in other promoters, such as the human IFNbeta promoter, suggests that PAUSE-1 is 
a member of a family of universal silencers with the consensus sequence
TCTN(x)AGA. UV crosslinking analyses determined that the PAUSE-1 binding protein 
was approximately 67 kDa. Insertion of PAUSE-1 into the heterologous (SV40) or
the minimal PAI-2 promoters silenced transcription by 2.5-fold. These data show
that PAUSE-1 acts as a powerful silencer of PAI-2 gene transcription and is
likely to be important in the silencing of other genes as well.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/29.19.3919 
PMCID: PMC60233
PMID: 11574673  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


267. RNA. 2001 Sep;7(9):1239-53.

An in vitro-selected RNA-binding site for the KH domain protein PSI acts as a
splicing inhibitor element.

Amarasinghe AK(1), MacDiarmid R, Adams MD, Rio DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
94720, USA.

P element somatic inhibitor (PSI) is a 97-kDa RNA-binding protein with four KH
motifs that is involved in the inhibition of splicing of the Drosophila P element
third intron (IVS3) in somatic cells. PSI interacts with a negative regulatory
element in the IVS3 5' exon. This element contains two pseudo-5' splice sites,
termed F1 and F2. To identify high affinity binding sites for the PSI protein, in
vitro selection (SELEX) was performed using a random RNA oligonucleotide pool.
Alignment of high affinity PSI-binding RNAs revealed a degenerate consensus
sequence consisting of a short core motif of CUU flanked by alternative purines
and pyrimidines. Interestingly, this sequence resembles the F2 pseudo-5' splice
site in the P element negative regulatory element. Additionally, a negative in
vitro selection of PCR-mutagenized P element 5' exon regulatory element RNAs
identified two U residues in the F1 and F2 pseudo-5' splice sites as important
nucleotides for PSI binding and the U residue in the F2 region is a nearly
invariant nucleotide in the consensus SELEX motif. The high affinity PSI SELEX
sequence acted as a splicing inhibitor when placed in the context of a P element 
splicing pre-mRNA in vitro. Data from in vitro splicing assays, UV crosslinking
and RNA-binding competition experiments indicates a strong correlation between
the binding affinities of PSI for the SELEX sequences and their ability to
modulate splicing of P element IVS3 in vitro.

DOI: 10.1017/s1355838201010603 
PMCID: PMC1370169
PMID: 11565747  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


268. RNA. 2001 Sep;7(9):1185-91.

Modulation of msl-2 5' splice site recognition by Sex-lethal.

Förch P(1), Merendino L, Martínez C, Valcárcel J.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Expression Programme, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg, 
Germany.

The protein Sex-lethal (SXL) controls dosage compensation in Drosophila by
inhibiting splicing and subsequently translation of male-specific-lethal-2
(msl-2) transcripts. We have previously shown that SXL blocks the binding of U2
auxiliary factor (U2AF) to the polypyrimidine (Py)-tract associated with the 3'
splice site of the regulated intron. We now report that a second pyrimidine-rich 
sequence containing 11 consecutive uridines immediately downstream from the 5'
splice site is required for efficient splicing inhibition by SXL.
Psoralen-mediated crosslinking experiments suggest that SXL binding to this
uridine-rich sequence inhibits recognition of the 5' splice site by U1 snRNP in
HeLa nuclear extracts. We also show that SXL interferes with the binding of the
protein TIA-1 to the uridine-rich stretch. Because TIA-1 binding to this sequence
is necessary for U1 snRNP recruitment to msl-25' splice site and for splicing of 
this pre-mRNA, we propose that SXL antagonizes TIA-1 activity and thus prevents
5' splice site recognition by U1 snRNP. Taken together with previous data, we
conclude that efficient retention of msl-2 intron involves inhibition of early
recognition of both splice sites by SXL.

DOI: 10.1017/s1355838201010536 
PMCID: PMC1370165
PMID: 11565743  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Nucleic Acids Res. 2001 Sep 15;29(18):3892-9.

Replication protein A modulates its interface with the primed DNA template during
RNA-DNA primer elongation in replicating SV40 chromosomes.

Mass G(1), Nethanel T, Lavrik OI, Wold MS, Kaufmann G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tel Aviv University, Ramat Aviv, 69978 Israel.

The eukaryal single-stranded DNA binding protein replication protein A (RPA)
binds short oligonucleotides with high affinity but exhibits low cooperativity in
binding longer templates, opposite to prokaryal counterparts. This discrepancy
could reflect the smaller size of the replicative template portion availed to
RPA. According to current models, this portion accommodates an RNA-DNA primer
(RDP) of <40 nt (nested discontinuity) or a several-fold longer Okazaki fragment 
(initiation zone). Previous in situ UV-crosslinking revealed that RPA also
interacts with nascent DNA, especially growing RDPs. Here we compare nascent SV40
DNA chains UV-crosslinked to the middle and large RPA subunits and use the data
to re-examine the two models. The middle subunit interacted with the nascent
chains after a few DNA residues were added to the RNA primer while the large
subunit became accessible after extension by several more. Upon RDP maturation,
the middle subunit disengaged while the large subunit remained accessible during 
further limited extension. A corresponding shift in preference in favor of the
large subunit has been reported for purified RPA and synthetic gapped duplexes
upon reduction of the gap from 19 to 9 nt. Combined, these facts support the
proposal that the mature RDP faces downstream a correspondingly small gap,
possibly created by removal of the RNA primer moiety from an adjacent, previously
synthesized RDP (nested discontinuity) but insufficient for continuous elongation
of the RDP into an Okazaki fragment (initiation zone).

DOI: 10.1093/nar/29.18.3892 
PMCID: PMC55912
PMID: 11557822  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


270. RNA. 2001 Aug;7(8):1126-41.

Poly(rC) binding proteins mediate poliovirus mRNA stability.

Murray KE(1), Roberts AW, Barton DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center,
Denver 80262, USA.

The 5'-terminal 88 nt of poliovirus RNA fold into a cloverleaf RNA structure and 
form ribonucleoprotein complexes with poly(rC) binding proteins (PCBPs; AV
Gamarnik, R Andino, RNA, 1997, 3:882-892; TB Parsley, JS Towner, LB Blyn, E
Ehrenfeld, BL Semler, RNA, 1997, 3:1124-1134). To determine the functional role
of these ribonucleoprotein complexes in poliovirus replication, HeLa S10
translation-replication reactions were used to quantitatively assay poliovirus
mRNA stability, poliovirus mRNA translation, and poliovirus negative-strand RNA
synthesis. Ribohomopoly(C) RNA competitor rendered wild-type poliovirus mRNA
unstable in these reactions. A 5'-terminal 7-methylguanosine cap prevented the
degradation of wild-type poliovirus mRNA in the presence of ribohomopoly(C)
competitor. Ribohomopoly(A), -(G), and -(U) did not adversely affect poliovirus
mRNA stability. Ribohomopoly(C) competitor RNA inhibited the translation of
poliovirus mRNA but did not inhibit poliovirus negative-strand RNA synthesis when
poliovirus replication proteins were provided in trans using a chimeric helper
mRNA possessing the hepatitis C virus IRES. A C24A mutation prevented UV
crosslinking of PCBPs to 5' cloverleaf RNA and rendered poliovirus mRNA unstable.
A 5'-terminal 7-methylguanosine cap blocked the degradation of C24A mutant
poliovirus mRNA. The C24A mutation did not inhibit the translation of poliovirus 
mRNA nor diminish viral negative-strand RNA synthesis relative to wild-type RNA. 
These data support the conclusion that poly(rC) binding protein(s) mediate the
stability of poliovirus mRNA by binding to the 5'-terminal cloverleaf structure
of poliovirus mRNA. Because of the general conservation of 5' cloverleaf RNA
sequences among picornaviruses, including C24 in loop b of the cloverleaf, we
suggest that viral mRNA stability of polioviruses, coxsackieviruses, echoviruses,
and rhinoviruses is mediated by interactions between PCBPs and 5' cloverleaf RNA.

DOI: 10.1017/s1355838201010044 
PMCID: PMC1370160
PMID: 11497431  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Aug 14;98(17):9778-83. Epub 2001 Jul 31.

Molecular cloning of Porimin, a novel cell surface receptor mediating oncotic
cell death.

Ma F(1), Zhang C, Prasad KV, Freeman GJ, Schlossman SF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Tumor Immunology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Department of
Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Anti-Porimin (Pro-oncosis receptor inducing membrane injury) mAb mediates
oncosis-like cell death in Jurkat cells. Porimin cDNA was isolated from a Jurkat 
cell cDNA library by COS cell-expression cloning. The 3,337-bp cDNA has an ORF of
567 bp, encoding a type I transmembrane protein of 189 amino acids. The
extracellular domain of Porimin contains many O-linked and seven N-linked
glycosylation sites that define it as a new member of the mucin family. COS7 and 
293 cells transiently transfected with Porimin cDNA were specifically recognized 
by anti-Porimin Ab in cell staining and immunoblotting experiments. When
expressed in Jurkat cells, a His-tagged Porimin cDNA construct resulted in the
generation of a specific 110-kDa-size protein that matched the molecular mass of 
the endogenous Porimin protein. Crosslinking of the Porimin receptor expressed on
COS7 transfectants resulted in the loss of cell membrane integrity and cell death
as measured by the leakage of intracellular lactate dehydrogenase. Both COS7 and 
293 cells expressing transfected Porimin at a relatively high level lost their
ability to adhere to culture dishes, suggesting a role for Porimin in cell
adhesion. The Porimin gene was mapped to human chromosome 11q22.1 and is composed
of four exons spanning 133 kb of genomic DNA.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.171322898 
PMCID: PMC55529
PMID: 11481458  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


272. RNA. 2001 Jul;7(7):1013-23.

ATP-dependent interaction of yeast U5 snRNA loop 1 with the 5' splice site.

Alvi RK(1), Lund M, Okeefe RT.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Manchester, United Kingdom.

Pre-messenger RNA splicing is a two-step process by which introns are removed and
exons joined together. In yeast, the U5 snRNA loop 1 interacts with the 5' exon
before the first step of splicing and with the 5' and 3' exons before the second 
step. In vitro studies revealed that yeast U5 loop 1 is not required for the
first step of splicing but is essential for holding the 5' and 3' exons for
ligation during the second step. It is critical, therefore, that loop 1 contacts 
the 5' exon before the first step of splicing to hold this exon following
cleavage from the pre-mRNA. At present it is not known how U5 loop 1 is
positioned on the 5' exon prior to the first step of splicing. To address this
question, we have used site-specific photoactivated crosslinking in yeast
spliceosomes to investigate the interaction of U5 loop 1 with the pre-mRNA prior 
to the first step of splicing. We have found that the highly conserved uridines
in loop 1 make ATP-dependent contacts with an approximately 8-nt region at the 5'
splice site that includes the invariant GU. These interactions are dependent on
functional U2 and U6 snRNAs. Our results support a model where U5 snRNA loop 1
interacts with the 5' exon in two steps during its targeting to the 5' splice
site.

DOI: 10.1017/s135583820101041x 
PMCID: PMC1370142
PMID: 11453062  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Nucleic Acids Res. 2001 Jun 15;29(12):2535-41.

Hepatitis C virus internal ribosome entry site RNA contains a tertiary structural
element in a functional domain of stem-loop II.

Lyons AJ(1), Lytle JR, Gomez J, Robertson HD.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Biochemistry and Structural Biology, Weill Graduate School of
Medical Sciences of Cornell University, 1300 York Avenue, New York, NY 10021,
USA.

The internal ribosome entry site (IRES) of hepatitis C virus (HCV) RNA contains
>300 bases of highly conserved 5'-terminal sequence, most of it in the uncapped
5'-untranslated region (5'-UTR) upstream from the single AUG initiator triplet at
which translation of the HCV polyprotein begins. Although progress has been made 
in defining singularities like the RNA pseudoknot near this AUG, the sequence and
structural features of the HCV IRES which stimulate accurate and efficient
initiation of protein synthesis are only partially defined. Here we report that a
region further upstream from the AUG, stem-loop II of the HCV IRES, also contains
an element of local tertiary structure which we have detected using RNase H
cleavage and have mapped using the singular ability of two bases therein to
undergo covalent intra-chain crosslinking stimulated by UV light. This
pre-existing element maps to two non-contiguous stretches of the HCV IRES
sequence, residues 53-68 and 103-117. Several earlier studies have shown that the
correct sequence between bases 45 and 70 of the HCV IRES stem-loop II domain is
required for initiation of protein synthesis. Because features of local tertiary 
structure like the one we report here are often associated with protein binding, 
we propose that the HCV stem-loop II element is directly involved in IRES action.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/29.12.2535 
PMCID: PMC55737
PMID: 11410661  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Nucleic Acids Res. 2001 May 1;29(9):1852-63.

Targeting peptide nucleic acid (PNA) oligomers to mitochondria within cells by
conjugation to lipophilic cations: implications for mitochondrial DNA
replication, expression and disease.

Muratovska A(1), Lightowlers RN, Taylor RW, Turnbull DM, Smith RA, Wilce JA,
Martin SW, Murphy MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Otago, PO Box 56, Dunedin, New
Zealand.

The selective manipulation of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) replication and
expression within mammalian cells has proven difficult. One promising approach is
to use peptide nucleic acid (PNA) oligomers, nucleic acid analogues that bind
selectively to complementary DNA or RNA sequences inhibiting replication and
translation. However, the potential of PNAs is restricted by the difficulties of 
delivering them to mitochondria within cells. To overcome this problem we
conjugated a PNA 11mer to a lipophilic phosphonium cation. Such cations are taken
up by mitochondria through the lipid bilayer driven by the membrane potential
across the inner membrane. As anticipated, phosphonium-PNA (ph-PNA) conjugates of
3.4-4 kDa were imported into both isolated mitochondria and mitochondria within
human cells in culture. This was confirmed by using an ion-selective electrode to
measure uptake of the ph-PNA conjugates; by cell fractionation in conjunction
with immunoblotting; by confocal microscopy; by immunogold-electron microscopy;
and by crosslinking ph-PNA conjugates to mitochondrial matrix proteins. In all
cases dissipating the mitochondrial membrane potential with an uncoupler
prevented ph-PNA uptake. The ph-PNA conjugate selectively inhibited the in vitro 
replication of DNA containing the A8344G point mutation that causes the human
mtDNA disease 'myoclonic epilepsy and ragged red fibres' (MERRF) but not the
wild-type sequence that differs at a single nucleotide position. Therefore these 
modified PNA oligomers retain their selective binding to DNA and the lipophilic
cation delivers them to mitochondria within cells. When MERRF cells were
incubated with the ph-PNA conjugate the ratio of MERRF to wild-type mtDNA was
unaffected, even though the ph-PNA content of the mitochondria was sufficient to 
inhibit MERRF mtDNA replication in a cell-free system. This unexpected finding
suggests that nucleic acid derivatives cannot bind their complementary sequences 
during mtDNA replication. In summary, we have developed a new strategy for
targeting PNA oligomers to mitochondria and used it to determine the effects of
PNA on mutated mtDNA replication in cells. This work presents new approaches for 
the manipulation of mtDNA replication and expression, and will assist in the
development of therapies for mtDNA diseases.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/29.9.1852 
PMCID: PMC37250
PMID: 11328868  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Clin Immunol. 2001 May;99(2):253-65.

Cell surface CD28 levels define four CD4+ T cell subsets: abnormal expression in 
rheumatoid arthritis.

Salazar-Fontana LI(1), Sanz E, Mérida I, Zea A, Sanchez-Atrio A, Villa L,
Martínez-A C, de la Hera A, Alvarez-Mon M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology and Oncology, School of Medicine, University of
Alcalá-Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas (CSIC) Associated Unit, Ctra.
Madrid-Barcelona Km. 33, 28871 Alcalá de Henares, Madrid, Spain.

CD28 is a costimulatory receptor expressed in most CD4(+) T cells. Despite the
long-standing evidence for up- and downregulation of surface CD28 expression in
vitro, and the key regulatory role assigned to the upregulation of CD28
counterreceptor [the CD152 (CTLA-4) molecule], in vivo CD28 induction has
attracted little attention. We studied CD28 and CD152 expression and function in 
33 rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients, 20 clinically active and 13 inactive, and 
in 24 healthy donors. Four subsets of CD28(-), CD28(low), CD28(int), and
CD28(high) peripheral blood human CD4(+) T cells were defined using three-color
flow cytometry. The three CD28(+) subsets displayed a one-, two-, or threefold
quantitative difference in their relative number of CD28 antibody binding sites, 
respectively (P < 0.01). RA patients, whether active or inactive, showed a
distinct phenotype when compared to healthy donors: (i) the percentage of
CD4(+)CD28(high) cells was increased twofold and the CD4(+)CD28(low) subset was
reduced twofold (P < 0.01) and (ii) the CD4(+)CD28(high) cells from RA patients
showed an in vivo activated phenotype, CD45RO(+)CD5(high)IL-2Ralpha(+) (P <
0.01). Active RA patients were different from inactive patients. They showed a
twofold increase in mean CD28 expression (P < 0.05), whereas each of the CD28(+) 
subsets in the inactive RA patients showed reduced expression when compared to
healthy donors. Notably, both active and inactive RA patients showed abnormal
CD28 upregulation when T cells were activated in vitro with CD3 antibodies, but
only inactive RA patients showed a hypoproliferative response to TCR/CD3
triggering when compared to healthy donors (P < 0.01). This defective
proliferation was normalized by concurrent crosslinking with CD28 antibody. No
differences were noted in the expression of CD152 or CD80, a CD28 and CD152
shared ligand. The disregulated in vivo expression of CD28 was related to the RA 
patients' disease activity and suggests that modulation of CD28 surface levels
may be an additional mechanism to finely tune the delicate
responsiveness/tolerance balance.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/clim.2001.5003 
PMID: 11318597  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Eur J Biochem. 2001 Apr;268(8):2261-9.

Insight into thyrotropin receptor cleavage by engineering the single polypeptide 
chain luteinizing hormone receptor into a cleaving, two subunit receptor.

Chazenbalk GD(1), McLachlan SM, Chen CR, Rapoport B.

Author information: 
(1)Autoimmune Disease Unit, Cedars-Sinai Research Institute and School of
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA.

To gain insight into the thyrotropin hormone (TSH) receptor (TSHR) cleavage, we
sought to convert the noncleaving luteinizing hormone (LH) receptor (LHR) into a 
cleaved, two-subunit molecule. For this purpose, we generated a series of LHR
mutants and chimeric LH-TSH receptors. Cleavage of mature, ligand binding
receptors on the cell surface was determined by covalent 125I-labeled hCG
crosslinking to intact, stably transfected mammalian cells. We first targeted a
cluster of three N-linked glycans in the LHR (N295, N303, N317) in a region
corresponding to the primary TSHR cleavage site, which has only one N-linked
glycan. Elimination by mutagenesis of the most strategic N-linked glycan
(LHR-N317Q) generated only a trace amount of LHR cleavage. Removal of the other
N-linked glycans had no additive effect. A much greater degree of cleavage (
approximately 50%) was evident in a chimeric LH-TSHR in which the juxtamembrane
segment of the LHR (domain E; amino acids 317-367) was replaced with the
corresponding domain of the TSHR (residues 363-418). Similarly cleaving LHR were 
created using a much smaller component within this region, namely LHR-NET317-319 
replaced with TSHR-GQE367-369, or by substitution of the same three amino-acid
residues with AAA (LHR-NET317-319AAA). In summary, our data alter current
concepts regarding TSHR cleavage by suggesting limited (not absent) amino-acid
specificity in a region important for TSHR cleavage (GQE367-369). The data also
support the concept of a separate and distinct downstream cleavage site 2 in the 
TSHR.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1432-1327.2001.02103.x 
PMID: 11298743  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Curr Opin Microbiol. 2001 Apr;4(2):119-25.

Transcription elongation complex: structure and function.

Korzheva N(1), Mustaev A.

Author information: 
(1)Public Health Research Institute, 455 First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.
kornata@phri.nyu.edu

Our understanding of the mechanisms of transcription has been greatly advanced by
recent determination of the X-ray structure of bacterial RNA polymerase. Using
crosslinking approaches, extensive mapping of DNA and RNA contacts onto this
structure allowed tracking of the path of nucleic acids through the transcription
elongation complex. The resulting structural model of the transcription
elongation complex is linked to the functional one, which is based on numerous
data accumulated during previous studies of RNA synthesis. An integrated
structure-function model allows the rational explanation of termination and
pausing and provides new insights into the mechanisms of transcription.


PMID: 11282465  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Mol Immunol. 2000 Aug-Sep;37(12-13):735-44.

Molecular characterization of the rat NK cell receptor 2B4.

Kumaresan PR(1), Stepp SE, Verrett PC, Chuang SS, Boles KS, Lai WC, Ryan JC,
Bennett M, Kumar V, Mathew PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Immunology, University of North Texas
Health Science Center, 3500 Camp Bowie Blvd., Fort Worth, TX 76107, USA.

2B4 (CD244) is a cell surface glycoprotein of the immunoglobulin superfamily
involved in the regulation of natural killer and T lymphocyte function. It is the
high affinity counter-receptor for CD48. In mouse and human NK cells,
crosslinking of 2B4 with a specific monoclonal antibody or with CD48 can trigger 
cell-mediated cytotoxicity, IFN-gamma secretion, phosphoinositol turnover and NK 
cell invasiveness. Recent reports of defective 2B4 signaling and NK cell function
in X-linked lymphoproliferative syndrome suggest that this may contribute to the 
progression of this human disease. Here we describe the molecular
characterization of the rat 2B4 gene. The cDNA encodes a protein of 395 amino
acid residues that contain two Ig domains in the extracellular region and three
unique tyrosine motifs (TxYxxV/I/A) in the cytoplasmic region. The predicted
protein has 81 and 68% similarity with mouse 2B4 and human 2B4, respectively.
Additionally, it has 94 and 89% similarity at the protein level with the recently
reported rat 2B4 related genes, r2B4R-tm and r2B4R-se respectively. Northern blot
analysis indicated the presence of multiple transcripts in rat LAK cells and
RNK-16 cells. Immunoprecipitation and deglycosylation studies showed that rat 2B4
is glycosylated to similar extent as that of mouse and human 2B4. The cloning of 
r2B4 in the light of the availability of rat NK cell lines should facilitate in
vitro and in vivo experiments to decipher the functional role of 2B4 in NK cell
biology.

DOI: 10.1016/s0161-5890(00)00103-6 
PMID: 11275258  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


279. J Cell Sci. 2001 Apr;114(Pt 7):1387-95.

BMP-2 augments FGF-induced differentiation of PC12 cells through upregulation of 
FGF receptor-1 expression.

Hayashi H(1), Ishisaki A, Suzuki M, Imamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Discovery Research Center, National Institute of Advanced Industrial
Science and Technology, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8566, Japan.

When exposed to various neurotrophic factors, including fibroblast growth factors
(FGF)-1 and -2, rat pheochromocytoma-derived PC12 cells differentiate into
sympathetic neuron-like cells possessing elongated neurites. We found that while 
bone morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP-2) exerted little effect by itself on the
differentiation of PC12 cells, in combination with FGF it strongly induced
neurite outgrowth, even at subthreshold concentrations of FGF. Analysis of gene
expression revealed that FGF receptor-1 (FGFR-1) mRNA was abundantly expressed in
PC12 cells and that its expression was upregulated by pretreating the cells with 
BMP-2. Crosslinking the receptors with (125)I-FGF-2 and then immunoprecipitating 
them confirmed that expression of FGFR-1, but not other FGF receptor types, was
enhanced by BMP-2. Furthermore, Scatchard analyses revealed that the numbers of
FGF-2 binding sites were increased by approximately 40% after BMP-2 treatment.
Pretreatment with BMP-2 also enhanced peak and sustained levels of FGF-induced
ERK1/2 phosphorylation in PC12 cells. Finally, the augmentation of neurotrophic
activity by BMP-2 was inhibited by SU5402, an FGFR-1 inhibitor. These findings
indicate that BMP-2 augments FGF-induced differentiation of PC12 cells through
selective upregulation of FGFR-1 expression, and suggest that BMP-2 and FGF act
in concert to regulate cell differentiation in the nervous system.


PMID: 11257004  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Mol Biol Rep. 2000 Sep;27(3):191-4.

Human SP1 but not human AP1 binding to the TGF-beta element in the 5' flanking
region of the rat PROalpha1(I) collagen gene.

Cutroneo KR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, College of Medicine, University of Vermont,
Burlington 05405, USA. kenneth.cutroneo@uvm.edu

The consensus TGF-beta element (TGCCCACGGCCAG) located at approximately -161Obp
from the start site of transcription of the rat pro alpha1(I) collagen gene has
recently been shown to be required for the basal promoter activity of this gene
(Meisler et al., J. Cell Biochem. 75: 196, 1999). Site directed mutation of this 
TGF-beta element resulted in almost complete abolishment of the basal promoter
activity of the fibroblasts transfected with the 3.6 ColCat plasmid which
contains a 3.6 kb portion of the 5' flanking region of the rat pro alpha1(I)
collagen gene linked to the reporter gene, chloramphenicol acetyltransferase
(CAT). Southwestern analysis of the nuclear protein binding to the TGF-beta
element revealed a 34,000 Da complex while after UV-crosslinking, studies
revealed a TGF-beta element nuclear protein complex of 82,000 Da (Ritzenthaler et
al., J. Biol. Chem. 268: 13625, 1993). Thus, a multiple protein TGF-beta DNA
element complex may exist which may promote the transcription of the rat pro
alpha1(I) collagen gene. Since literature findings indicate that a nuclear factor
interacts with an SP1-like binding site of the human pro alpha1(I) collagen
promoter and an AP-1 binding sequence has been shown to be involved in the
regulation of the human pro alpha2(I) collagen gene and both these binding
sequences are TGF-beta1 responsive, we determined whether the TGF-beta element
located in the 5' flanking region of the rat pro alpha1(I) collagen gene formed
complexes with either of these nuclear factors or both.


PMID: 11254109  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2001 Apr;11(2):209-14.

Mechanism of transcription initiation and promoter escape by RNA polymerase II.

Dvir A(1), Conaway JW, Conaway RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Oakland University, Rochester, Michigan
48309, USA.

Recently, key advances in biochemical and structural studies of RNA polymerase II
(pol II) and the basal transcriptional machinery have shed considerable light on 
the basic mechanisms underlying the initiation stage of eukaryotic mRNA
synthesis. The development of methods for obtaining crystal structures of pol II 
and its complexes has revolutionized transcriptional studies and holds promise
that aspects of initiation will soon be understood at atomic resolution;
crosslinking studies have revealed intriguing features of the topology of the pol
II initiation complex and provided working models for dynamic steps of
initiation; and mechanistic studies have identified promoter escape as a critical
step during initiation and brought to light novel roles for the general
initiation factors TFIIE, TFIIF, and TFIIH in this process.


PMID: 11250146  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


282. J Mol Biol. 2001 Mar 2;306(4):631-42.

Mapping the molecular interface between the sigma(70) subunit of E. coli RNA
polymerase and T4 AsiA.

Minakhin L(1), Camarero JA, Holford M, Parker C, Muir TW, Severinov K.

Author information: 
(1)Waksman Institute of Microbiology, Department of Genetics, Rutgers, The State 
University of New Jersey, USA.

Bacteriophage T4 antisigma protein AsiA (10 kDa) orchestrates a switch from the
host and early viral transcription to middle viral transcription by binding to
the sigma(70) subunit of E. coli RNA polymerase. The molecular determinants of
sigma(70)-AsiA complex formation are not known. Here, we used combinatorial
peptide chemistry, protein-protein crosslinking, and mutational analysis to study
the interaction between AsiA and its target, the 33 amino acid residues-long
sigma(70) peptide containing conserved region 4.2. Many region 4.2 amino acid
residues contact AsiA, which likely completely occludes the DNA-binding surface
of region 4.2. Though none of region 4.2 amino acid residues is singularly
responsible for the very tight interaction with AsiA, sigma(70) Lys593 and Arg596
which lie outside the putative DNA recognition element of region 4.2, contribute 
the most. In AsiA, the first 20 amino acid residues are both necessary and
sufficient for interactions with sigma(70). Our results clarify details of
sigma(70)-AsiA interaction and open the way for engineering AsiA derivatives with
altered specificities.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.2001.4445 
PMID: 11243776  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


283. RNA. 2001 Jan;7(1):71-84.

Arrangement of the central pseudoknot region of 16S rRNA in the 30S ribosomal
subunit determined by site-directed 4-thiouridine crosslinking.

Juzumiene DI(1), Wollenzien P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, North Carolina State University, Raleigh
27695-7622, USA.

The 16S rRNA central pseudoknot region in the 30S ribosomal subunit has been
investigated by photocrosslinking from 4-thiouridine (s4U) located in the first
20 nt of the 16S rRNA. RNA fragments (nt 1-20) were made by in vitro
transcription to incorporate s4U at every uridine position or were made by
chemical synthesis to incorporate s4U into one of the uridine positions at +5,
+14, +17, or +20. These were ligated to RNA containing nt 21-1542 of the 16S rRNA
sequence and, after gel purification, the ligated RNA was reconstituted into 30S 
subunits. Long-range intramolecular crosslinks were produced by near-UV
irradiation; these were separated by gel electrophoresis and analyzed by reverse 
transcription reactions. A number of crosslinks are made in each of the
constructs, which must reflect the structural flexibility or conformational
heterogeneity in this part of the 30S subunit. All of the constructs show
crosslinking to the 559-562, 570-571, and 1080-1082 regions; however, other sites
are crosslinked specifically from each s4U position. The most distinctive
crosslinking sites are: 341-343 and 911-917 for s4U(+5); 903-904 (very strong),
1390-1397, and 1492 for s4U(+14); and 903-904 (moderate) for s4U(+17); in the
1070-1170 region in which there are different patterns for each s4U position.
These results indicate that part of the central pseudoknot is in close contact
with the decoding region, with helix 27 in the 885-912 interval and with part of 
domain III RNA. Crosslinking between s4U(+14) and 1395-1397 is consistent with
base pairing at U14-A1398.

DOI: 10.1017/s1355838201001728 
PMCID: PMC1370071
PMID: 11214183  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Virus Res. 2001 Jan;73(1):67-79.

Interaction of poly(rC)-binding protein 2 with the 5'-terminal stem loop of the
hepatitis C-virus genome.

Fukushi S(1), Okada M, Kageyama T, Hoshino FB, Nagai K, Katayama K.

Author information: 
(1)R&D Center, BioMedical Laboratories, 1361-1, Matoba, Kawagoe-shi, 350-1101,
Saitama, Japan. sfukushi@alk.co.jp

The 5' noncoding region (NCR) of hepatitis C virus (HCV) contains an internal
ribosome entry site for translation initiation. Cellular proteins (e.g. La,
polypyrimidine tract-binding protein, and p25) that interact with HCV 5' NCR have
been implicated in facilitating efficient internal initiation. The 5' NCR may
also contain RNA structures and specific RNA sequences that interact with
cellular proteins to promote RNA replication. UV crosslinking experiments
revealed a 43-kDa cellular protein (p43) also interacts with the HCV 5' NCR.
Further UV crosslinking experiments with deletion mutants of HCV 5' NCR
demonstrated that p43 bound specifically to the 5'-terminal stem-loop of the HCV 
5' NCR. Achromobactor proteinase I digests, competition experiments, and
immunoprecipitation confirmed that p43 was identical to human poly(rC)-binding
protein 2 (PCBP2). We prepared a PCBP2-immunodepleted rabbit reticulocyte lysate 
with an anti-PCBP2 antibody. Translation activity promoted by the HCV internal
ribosome-entry site was the same in PCBP2-depleted lysates as in mock-depleted
lysates. In conclusion, PCBP2 specifically interacted with the 5' terminus of HCV
genome but had no effect on HCV translation. We speculate that PCBP2's
interaction with HCV 5' NCR may be involved in the replication-initiation complex
of HCV.

DOI: 10.1016/s0168-1702(00)00228-8 
PMID: 11163645  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Hum Mol Genet. 2001 Feb 15;10(4):423-9.

Direct interactions of the five known Fanconi anaemia proteins suggest a common
functional pathway.

Medhurst AL(1), Huber PA, Waisfisz Q, de Winter JP, Mathew CG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Guy's, King's and St Thomas'
School of Medicine, 8th Floor, Guy's Tower, Guy's Hospital, London SE1 9RT, UK.

Fanconi anaemia (FA) is an autosomal recessive inherited disorder associated with
a progressive aplastic anaemia, diverse congenital abnormalities and cancer. The 
condition is genetically heterogeneous, with at least seven complementation
groups (A-G) described. Cells from individuals who are homozygous for mutations
in FA genes are characterized by chromosomal instability and hypersensitivity to 
DNA interstrand crosslinking agents. These features suggest a possible role for
the encoded proteins in the recognition or repair of these lesions, but neither
their function nor whether they operate in a concerted or discrete functional
pathways is known. The recent cloning of the FANCF and FANCE genes has allowed us
to investigate the interaction of the proteins encoded by five of the seven
complementation groups of FA. We used the yeast two-hybrid system and
co-immunoprecipitation analysis to test the 10 possible pairs of proteins for
direct interaction. In addition to the previously described binding of FANCA to
FANCG, we now demonstrate direct interaction of FANCF with FANCG, of FANCC with
FANCE and a weaker interaction of FANCE with both FANCA and FANCG. These findings
show that the newly identified FANCE protein is an integral part of the FA
pathway, and support the concept of a functional link between all known proteins 
encoded by the genes that are mutated in this disorder. These proteins may act
either as a multimeric complex or by sequential recruitment of subsets of the
proteins in a common pathway that protects the genomic integrity of mammalian
cells.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/10.4.423 
PMID: 11157805  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Virology. 2000 Apr 10;269(2):462-70.

The 23-kDa protein coded by the 3'-terminal gene of citrus tristeza virus is an
RNA-binding protein.

López C(1), Navas-Castillo J, Gowda S, Moreno P, Flores R.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular de Plantas (UPV-CSIC), Universidad
Politécnica de Valencia, Avenida de los Naranjos s/n, Valencia, 46022, Spain.

The 23-kDa protein (p23), encoded by the 3'-proximal gene of the RNA of Citrus
tristeza virus (CTV), was overexpressed in Escherichia coli fused to the
maltose-binding protein and purified by affinity chromatography. Gel retardation 
and UV crosslinking assays demonstrated that p23 has the ability to cooperatively
bind single-stranded RNA in a non-sequence-specific manner. Formation of the
p23-RNA complex was dependent on the conformational state of p23 and on the
presence of a basic region, but the complex was stable at high salt
concentrations, suggesting that interactions other than those between the
negatively charged RNA and the basic region of p23 are involved. Competition
assays showed that the affinity of p23 for single-stranded and double-stranded
RNA was similar but considerably higher than for single-stranded and
double-stranded DNA. By use of a series of artificially generated mutants, the
RNA-binding domain of p23 was mapped between positions 50-86, a region containing
several basic amino acids and a putative zinc-finger domain. Additional
p23-derivatives lacking the conserved residues presumably involved in
coordinating the zinc ion showed RNA-binding activity, but with an apparent
dissociation constant higher than the wild-type protein. These conserved residues
might confer binding specificity or increase binding stability in vivo. Within
the Closteroviridae family, p23 is the only protein characterized so far showing 
RNA-binding activity.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/viro.2000.0235 
PMID: 10753724  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2001 Jan;42(1):206-9.

Expression of the melanin-concentrating hormone receptor in porcine and human
ciliary epithelial cells.

Hintermann E(1), Erb C, Talke-Messerer C, Liu R, Tanner H, Flammer J, Eberle AN.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Endocrinology, Department of Research, University Eye Clinic,
University Hospital and University Children's Hospital, Basel, Switzerland.

PURPOSE: To evaluate whether the receptors for melanin-concentrating hormone
(MCH) and its functional antagonist alpha-melanocyte-stimulating hormone
(alpha-MSH) are expressed in the ciliary epithelium. Furthermore, to examine
whether MCH, a neuropeptide involved in fluid and electrolyte homeostasis, may
influence ion flux mediated by Na,K (adenosine triphosphatase)-ATPase in a
ciliary epithelial cell line.
METHODS: Expression of MCH receptors (MCH-R) and alpha-MSH receptors (MSH-R) on
primary porcine ciliary pigmented epithelial (PE) cells and on a human
nonpigmented ciliary epithelial (NPE) cell line, ODM-2 was investigated by
radioligand binding studies and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR). The MCH-R was further characterized by photocrosslinking. Influence of 
MCH on Na, K-ATPase activity was evaluated by an Rb(+) transport assay.
RESULTS: MCH-R expression was observed at both the mRNA and protein levels in PE 
and NPE cells. In contrast, MSH-Rs were not detectable. At the mRNA level,
expression of slc-1 was shown and with crosslinking, a 44-kDa protein was
labeled. MCH showed no effect on Na,K-ATPase activity of NPE cells.
CONCLUSIONS: The presence of MCH-R in ciliary epithelial cells of both human and 
porcine origin but the absence of MSH-Rs indicates that in these cells, MCH and
alpha-MSH do not form a functionally antagonistic hormonal pair as they do in
several other systems. Although effects of MCH on intestinal water and ion
transport have been documented, a direct control of Na,K-ATPase activity was not 
detected in human NPE cells in vitro.


PMID: 11133869  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Dec 19;97(26):14109-14.

The specificity loop of T7 RNA polymerase interacts first with the promoter and
then with the elongating transcript, suggesting a mechanism for promoter
clearance.

Temiakov D(1), Mentesana PE, Ma K, Mustaev A, Borukhov S, McAllister WT.

Author information: 
(1)Morse Institute of Molecular Genetics, Department of Microbiology, State
University of New York Health Science Center at Brooklyn, 450 Clarkson Avenue,
Box 44, Brooklyn, NY 11203-2098, USA.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Jan 2;98(1):5-7.

During the early stages of transcription, T7 RNA polymerase forms an unstable
initiation complex that synthesizes and releases transcripts 2-8 nt in length
before disengaging from the promoter and isomerizing to a stable elongation
complex. In this study, we used RNA small middle dotprotein and RNA small middle 
dotDNA crosslinking methods to probe the location of newly synthesized RNA in
halted elongation complexes. The results indicate that the RNA in an elongation
complex remains in an RNA small middle dotDNA hybrid for about 8 nt from the site
of nucleotide addition and emerges to the surface of the enzyme about 12 nt from 
the addition site. Strikingly, as the transcript leaves its hybrid with the
template, the crosslinks it forms with the RNA polymerase involve a portion of a 
hairpin loop (the specificity loop) that makes specific contacts with the binding
region of the promoter during initiation. This observation suggests that the
specificity loop may have a dual role in transcription, binding first to the
promoter and subsequently interacting with the RNA product. It seems likely that 
association of the nascent RNA with the specificity loop facilitates
disengagement from the promoter and is an important part of the process that
leads to a stable elongation complex.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.250473197 
PMCID: PMC18879
PMID: 11095736  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Biol Reprod. 2000 Dec;63(6):1706-12.

SFE1, a constituent of the fertilization envelope in the sea urchin is made by
oocytes and contains low-density lipoprotein-receptor-like repeats.

Wessel GM(1), Conner S, Laidlaw M, Harrison J, LaFleur GJ Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, Brown University, Providence, Rhode 
Island 02912, USA. rhet@brown.edu

At fertilization in most animals, cortical granules of the egg or oocyte secrete 
their contents, whose function it is to modify the extracellular matrix. This
modified matrix then participates in the block to polyspermy and protection for
early embryonic development. In the sea urchin, contents of the cortical granules
are secreted within 30 sec of insemination. Several of these content proteins
then bind to the nascent vitelline layer of the egg and lift off the cell surface
to form a stable, impervious, fertilization envelope. At least six major proteins
are present in the envelope, and recently we have identified cDNA clones of two, 
ovoperoxidase, and SFE9. Here we report on the identification and
characterization of SFE1, a constituent of the fertilization envelope of the sea 
urchin Strongylocentrotus purpuratus, that has revealing characteristics of how
the envelope might form and what protein interaction domains might predominate.
We present the largest cDNA sequence we were able to identify representing
approximately two thirds of the predicted protein coding region. The C-terminal
half of the cognate SFE1 protein contains two different amino acid repeat motifs:
a cysteine-rich (15%) motif of 40 amino acids that is tandemly repeated 22 times 
and is followed by a serine/threonine-rich (38%) repeat of 63 amino acids that is
tandemly repeated 3.5 times. Surprisingly, just N-terminal to the cysteine-rich
repeat region is a sequence of five repeats with similarity to repeats in another
cortical granule protein, SFE9, and to the motif originally identified in the
receptor of low-density lipoproteins, the LDLr motif. The amino acid composition 
deduced from the partial SFE1 cDNA is similar also to the composition of
proteoliaisin, a protein thought to tether the ovoperoxidase to the vitelline
layer of the egg and thereby sequester the crosslinking activity of the
ovoperoxidase to a limited population of proteins in the fertilization envelope. 
However, by use of monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies to SFE1 and
proteoliaisin, we show here that they are distinct gene products. We also show
that SFE1 is packed selectively into the cortical granules and then is
crosslinked into the fertilization envelope following fertilization. In situ RNA 
hybridization analysis shows that the mRNA of SFE1 (9 kilobases) is present in
oocytes selectively and is turned over rapidly in the oocyte following germinal
vesicle breakdown. Our findings suggest that the gene encoding this major product
of the egg is activated concomitantly with the other cortical granule-specific
products already identified, and that a common LDLr-like motif of the
fertilization envelope may reveal a structural mechanism for protein interactions
in its construction.

DOI: 10.1095/biolreprod63.6.1706 
PMID: 11090439  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Genes Dev. 2000 Oct 15;14(20):2635-49.

High-resolution localization of Drosophila Spt5 and Spt6 at heat shock genes in
vivo: roles in promoter proximal pausing and transcription elongation.

Andrulis ED(1), Guzmán E, Döring P, Werner J, Lis JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Biotechnology Building, Cornell 
University, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA.

Recent studies have demonstrated roles for Spt4, Spt5, and Spt6 in the regulation
of transcriptional elongation in both yeast and humans. Here, we show that
Drosophila Spt5 and Spt6 colocalize at a large number of transcriptionally active
chromosomal sites on polytene chromosomes and are rapidly recruited to endogenous
and transgenic heat shock loci upon heat shock. Costaining with antibodies to
Spt6 and to either the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II or cyclin T, a
subunit of the elongation factor P-TEFb, reveals that all three factors have a
similar distribution at sites of active transcription. Crosslinking and
immunoprecipitation experiments show that Spt5 is present at uninduced heat shock
gene promoters, and that upon heat shock, Spt5 and Spt6 associate with the 5' and
3' ends of heat shock genes. Spt6 is recruited within 2 minutes of a heat shock, 
similar to heat shock factor (HSF); moreover, this recruitment is dependent on
HSF. These findings provide support for the roles of Spt5 in promoter-associated 
pausing and of Spt5 and Spt6 in transcriptional elongation in vivo.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.844200 
PMCID: PMC316984
PMID: 11040217  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Mol Genet Metab. 2000 Sep-Oct;71(1-2):212-24.

Mutations in the lysyl hydroxylase 1 gene that result in enzyme deficiency and
the clinical phenotype of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type VI.

Yeowell HN(1), Walker LC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Dermatology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina 27710, USA.

The Ehlers-Danlos syndromes are a heterogeneous group of inherited connective
tissue disorders that are characterized by joint hypermobility and skin fragility
and hyperextensibility. Patients with the autosomal recessive type VI variant of 
the Ehlers-Danlos syndromes (EDS VI), also classified as the kyphoscoliotic type,
are clinically characterized by neonatal kyphoscoliosis, generalized joint
laxity, skin fragility, and severe muscle hypotonia at birth. Biochemically, this
has been attributed to a deficiency of lysyl hydroxylase (LH), an important
posttranslational modifying enzyme in collagen biosynthesis. This enzyme
hydroxylates specific lysine residues in the collagen molecule to form
hydroxylysines which have two important functions. The residues serve as
attachment sites for galactose and glucosylgalactose and they also act as
precursors of the crosslinking process that gives collagen its tensile strength. 
At least 20 different mutations have been identified in the LH1 gene (the
originally described form) that contribute to LH deficiency and the clinical
characteristics of EDS VI. Two of these mutations, a large duplication of exons
10-16, arising from a homologous recombination of intronic Alu sequences, and a
nonsense mutation, Y511X, in exon 14 of the LH1 gene, have been identified in
five or more unrelated patients. Both mutations appear to have originated from a 
single ancestral gene. Alternative processing pathways involving alternate
splicing and mRNA degradation, which reduce the effect of the mutant allele and
restore partial activity of the enzyme, have been identified. A second class of
EDS VI has been proposed in which patients have the clinical phenotype of EDS VI 
but their levels of LH activity are normal. The biochemical basis for this form
of EDS VI is currently unknown.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/mgme.2000.3076 
PMID: 11001813  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Nat Struct Biol. 2000 Sep;7(9):782-5.

The orientation of DNA in an archaeal transcription initiation complex.

Bartlett MS(1), Thomm M, Geiduschek EP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Center for Molecular Genetics, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093-0634, USA.
bartlett@biomail.ucsd.edu

Comment in
    Nat Struct Biol. 2000 Sep;7(9):703-5.

RNA polymerase from the hyperthermophile archaeon Pyrococcus furiosus (Pfu) forms
specific and transcriptionally active complexes with its conjugate transcription 
factors TBP (the archaeal TATA binding protein homolog) and TFB (the archaeal
homolog of eukaryotic RNA polymerase II and III transcription factors TFIIB and
Brf) at the Pfu glutamate dehydrogenase promoter. A photochemical crosslinking
method was used to map the vicinity of the catalytic subunits of Pfu RNA
polymerase to DNA locations distributed along the polymerase-promoter interface. 
The largest component of this archaeal polymerase is split into two subunits, A' 
and A", whose relatively sharp boundary of DNA crosslinking (probed on the
transcribed strand) is centered five to six base pairs downstream of the
transcriptional start site. A strong argument based on this information, on the
well-defined homology between the core bacterial, archaeal and eukaryotic RNA
polymerase subunits, and on the recently determined structure of a bacterial RNA 
polymerase specifies the directionality of DNA in the archaeal transcription
complex and its trajectory downstream of the transcriptional start site.

DOI: 10.1038/79020 
PMID: 10966650  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Mol Med. 2000 Mar;6(3):165-78.

Human breast carcinoma cells express type II IL-4 receptors and are sensitive to 
antitumor activity of a chimeric IL-4-Pseudomonas exotoxin fusion protein in
vitro and in vivo.

Leland P(1), Taguchi J, Husain SR, Kreitman RJ, Pastan I, Puri RK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Tumor Biology, Food and Drug Administration, Bethesda,
Maryland, USA.

BACKGROUND: Human breast carcinoma cell lines express high-affinity interleukin-4
receptors (IL-4R). We examined the expression and structure of these receptors on
primary and cultured breast carcinoma cell lines and normal breast epithelial
cells. We also tested the antitumor activity in vitro and in vivo of a fusion
protein comprised of circular permuted IL-4 and truncated Pseudomonas exotoxin,
termed IL-4(38-37)-PE38KDEL.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Eight different primary cell cultures and cell lines of
human breast carcinomas were examined for the expression of IL-4R by radiolabeled
binding, reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and Northern
analyses, and subunit structure by crosslinking studies. The antitumor activity
of IL-4 toxin was tested in vitro by cytotoxicity assays and in vivo in a
xenograft model in immunodeficient animals.
RESULTS: 125I-IL-4 specifically bound to primary cell cultures and cell lines
with a Kd ranging between 0.2 and 1 nM. Breast tumor cells were found to express 
IL-4R beta and IL-13R alpha' chains, but not IL-2R gamma c chain. These cells
were highly sensitive to the cytotoxic effect of IL-4(38-37)-PE38KDEL. The IC50
(concentration inhibiting protein synthesis by 50%) ranged between approximately 
0.005-1.5 nM. A normal breast epithelial cell culture was not sensitive to the
cytotoxic activity of IL-4(38-37)-PE38KDEL. MDA-MB231 human breast carcinoma cell
line formed a rapidly growing tumor in nude mice. Intratumor and intraperitoneal 
administration of IL-4(38-37)-PE38KDEL caused a dose dependent regression of
established tumors. A control toxin, anti-Tac(Fv)-PE38KDEL, targeted to the IL-2 
receptor alpha chain did not cause regression of these tumors.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that IL-4(38-37)-PE38KDEL may be a useful
agent for targeting of IL-4 receptor positive human breast carcinomas and further
studies should be performed to explore fully its potential.


PMCID: PMC1949945
PMID: 10965493  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Cell. 2000 Jun 9;101(6):613-23.

6S RNA regulates E. coli RNA polymerase activity.

Wassarman KM(1), Storz G.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology and Metabolism Branch, National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA. 
kwass@box-k.nih.gov

The E. coli 6S RNA was discovered more than three decades ago, yet its function
has remained elusive. Here, we demonstrate that 6S RNA associates with RNA
polymerase in a highly specific and efficient manner. UV crosslinking experiments
revealed that 6S RNA directly contacts the sigma70 and beta/beta' subunits of RNA
polymerase. 6S RNA accumulates as cells reach the stationary phase of growth and 
mediates growth phase-specific changes in RNA polymerase. Stable association
between sigma70 and core RNA polymerase in extracts is only observed in the
presence of 6S RNA. We show 6S RNA represses expression from a sigma70-dependent 
promoter during stationary phase. Our results suggest that the interaction of 6S 
RNA with RNA polymerase modulates sigma70-holoenzyme activity.

DOI: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)80873-9 
PMID: 10892648  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 May 27;272(1):45-54.

Molecular cloning of the mouse APS as a member of the Lnk family adaptor
proteins.

Iseki M(1), Takaki S, Takatsu K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Institute of Medical Science, University of Tokyo,
Japan.

Engagement of cell-surface receptors leads to activation of protein tyrosine
kinases, which in turn phosphorylate various downstream enzymes and adaptor
proteins. Lnk is an adaptor protein that appears to be involved in signal
transduction in lymphocytes, and forms an adaptor protein family with SH2-B. We
tried to identify another member of the adaptor protein family and isolated the
mouse APS (adaptor molecule containing PH and SH2 domains). APS contains a
proline-rich region, PH and SH2 domains, and a putative tyrosine phosphorylation 
site at the C-terminal, and the overall structure resembles those of Lnk and
SH2-B. APS is expressed in brain, kidney, muscle, and mature B cells in spleen.
Mouse APS gene consists of 8 coding exons and is deduced to map to chromosome 5. 
APS is tyrosine phosphorylated at the C-terminal phosphorylation site conserved
among the Lnk family adaptor proteins by stimulation of IL-5 or IL-3 as well as
by crosslinking of B cell receptor complex. These results suggest that APS is a
member of the Lnk family adaptor protein and likely plays a role in signaling in 
B cells.

DOI: 10.1006/bbrc.2000.2736 
PMID: 10872802  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


296. RNA. 2000 Apr;6(4):571-83.

In vitro selection of novel RNA ligands that bind human cytomegalovirus and block
viral infection.

Wang J(1), Jiang H, Liu F.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Infectious Diseases and Immunity, University of California,
Berkeley 94720, USA.

Ribonuclease-resistant RNA molecules that bind to infectious human
cytomegalovirus (HCMV) were isolated in vitro from a pool of randomized sequences
after 16 cycles of selection and amplification. The two ligands (L13 and L19)
characterized exhibited high HCMV-binding affinity in vitro and effectively
inhibited viral infection in tissue culture. Their antiviral activity was also
specific as they only reacted with two different strains of HCMV but not with the
related herpes simplex virus 1 and human cells. These two ligands appeared to
function as antivirals by blocking viral entry. Ultraviolet (UV) crosslinking
studies suggested that L13 and L19 bind to HCMV essential glycoproteins B and H, 
respectively. Thus, RNA ligands that bind to different surface antigens of HCMV
can be simultaneously isolated by the selection procedure. Our study demonstrates
the feasibility of using these RNA ligands as a research tool to identify viral
proteins required for infectivity and as an antiviral agent to block viral
infection.

DOI: 10.1017/s1355838200992215 
PMCID: PMC1369938
PMID: 10786848  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Nucleic Acids Symp Ser. 1999;(42):223-4.

Photodynamic antisense regulation using psoralen-conjugated oligo(nucleoside
phosphorothioate)s (I). Growth regulation of cervical carcinoma cells.

Iwase R(1), Yamayoshi A, Nishida J, Yamaoka T, Wake N, Murakami A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Polymer Science and Engineering, Kyoto Institute of Technology, 
Japan.

To increase the antisense regulatory effect of oligo(nucleoside
phosphorothioate)s (S-Oligo), a photo-crosslinking reagent, 4, 5',
8-trimethylpsoralen, was used in this study. Psoralen-conjugated oligo(nucleoside
phosphorothioate) (Ps-S-Oligo) complementary to the human papillomavirus type 18 
(HPV18) mRNA drastically inhibited the cellular proliferation of cervical cancer 
cells only upon UVA-irradiation. In contrast, Ps-S-Oligos with mismatched
sequences and scrambled one showed lesser inhibitory effects than that with
matched one. These results suggest that psoralen-conjugated antisense S-Oligo has
significant potential to regulate gene expression upon UVA-irradiation.


PMID: 10780460  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Nucleic Acids Res. 2000 May 1;28(9):1849-58.

RNA-protein crosslinking to AMP residues at internal positions in RNA with a new 
photocrosslinking ATP analog.

Costas C(1), Yuriev E, Meyer KL, Guion TS, Hanna MM.

Author information: 
(1)Designer Genes, Inc., 8281 East Evans Road, Suite 104, Scottsdale, AZ 85260,
USA.

A new photocrosslinking purine analog was synthesized and evaluated as a
transcription substrate for Escherichia coli RNA polymerase. This analog,
8-[(4-azidophenacyl)thio]adenosine 5'-triphosphate (8-APAS-ATP) contains an aryl 
azide photocrosslinking group that is attached to the ATP base via a
sulfur-linked arm on the 8 position of the purine ring. This position is not
involved in the normal Watson-Crick base pairing needed for specific
hybridization. Although 8-APAS-ATP could not replace ATP as a substrate for
transcription initiation, once stable elongation complexes were formed,
8-APAS-AMP could be site-specifically incorporated into the RNA, and this
transcript could be further elongated, placing the photoreactive analog at
internal positions in the RNA. Irradiation of transcription elongation complexes 
in which the RNA contained the analog exclusively at the 3' end of an RNA 22mer, 
or a 23mer with the analog 1 nt from the 3' end, produced RNA crosslinks to the
RNA polymerase subunits that form the RNA 3' end binding site (beta, beta'). Both
8-APAS-AMP and the related 8-azido-AMP were subjected to conformational modeling 
as nucleoside monophosphates and in DNA-RNA hybrids. Surprisingly, the lowest
energy conformation for 8-APAS-AMP was found to be syn, while that of 8-azido-AMP
was anti, suggesting that the conformational properties and transcription
substrate properties of 8-azido-ATP should be re-evaluated. Although the azide
and linker together are larger in 8-APAS-ATP than in 8-N(3)-ATP, the flexibility 
of the linker itself allows this analog to adopt several different energetically 
favorable conformations, making it a good substrate for the RNA polymerase.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/28.9.1849 
PMCID: PMC103291
PMID: 10756182  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


299. J Cell Sci. 2000 May;113 ( Pt 9):1635-47.

During both interphase and mitosis, DNA topoisomerase II interacts with DNA as
well as RNA through the protein's C-terminal domain.

Rzepecki R(1), Fisher PA.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Pharmacological Sciences, University Medical Center, The
State University of New York at Stony Brook, Stony Brook, NY 11794-8651, USA.

DNA topoisomerase II (topo II) is thought to be a nuclear enzyme; during
interphase most was insoluble and could be recovered in the pellet after
centrifugation of cell homogenates at 10,000 g (P-10). Upon entry into mitosis,
the majority of topo II did not associate with condensed chromosomes but was
apparently solubilized and redistributed throughout the cell. Although two
non-chromosomal subfractions of mitotic topo II were defined by centrifugation at
130,000 g, the vast majority (>90%) was recovered in the pellet (P-130). In vivo 
nucleic acid interactions with topo II were monitored by a recently developed
approach of UV-photo-crosslinking, immunoprecipitation and (32)P-labeling. P-10
(interphase) topo II was largely associated with DNA. P-130 (mitotic
non-chromosomal) topo II was primarily associated with RNA. These nucleic acid
interactions with both interphase and mitotic topo II occurred through the
catalytically inert and as yet, poorly understood C-terminal domain of the
protein. P-10 topo II was highly active enzymatically. Activity, measured by the 
ability of topo II to decatenate kDNA minicircles, was reduced by treatment with 
phosphatase. In contrast, P-130 topo II was relatively inactive but activity
could be increased by phosphatase treatment. In vivo, P-130 topo II was more
heavily phosphorylated than P-10 topo II; in both, only the C-terminal domain of 
topo II was detectably modified. Our observations suggest that cell
cycle-dependent changes in the distribution, nucleic acid interactions and
enzymatic activity of topo II are regulated, at least in part, by
phosphorylation/dephosphorylation.


PMID: 10751154  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Mar 28;97(7):3073-8.

HuR binding to cytoplasmic mRNA is perturbed by heat shock.

Gallouzi IE(1), Brennan CM, Stenberg MG, Swanson MS, Eversole A, Maizels N,
Steitz JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Yale University School of Medicine, 295 Congress Avenue, New Haven, CT
06536, USA.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Jan 21;100(2):763..

AU-rich elements (AREs) located in the 3' untranslated region target the mRNAs
encoding many protooncoproteins, cytokines, and lymphokines for rapid
degradation. HuR, a ubiquitously expressed member of the embryonic lethal
abnormal vision (ELAV) family of RNA-binding proteins, binds ARE sequences and
selectively stabilizes ARE-containing reporter mRNAs when overexpressed in
transiently transfected cells. HuR appears predominantly nucleoplasmic but has
been shown to shuttle between the nucleus and cytoplasm via a novel shuttling
sequence HNS. We report generation of a mouse monoclonal antibody 3A2 that both
immunoblots and immunoprecipitates HuR protein; it recognizes an epitope located 
in the first of HuR's three RNA recognition motifs. This antibody was used to
probe HuR interactions with mRNA before and after heat shock, a condition that
has been reported to stabilize ARE-containing mRNAs. At 37 degrees C,
approximately one-third of the cytoplasmic HuR appears polysome associated, and
in vivo UV crosslinking reveals that HuR interactions with poly(A)(+) RNA are
predominantly cytoplasmic rather than nuclear. This comprises evidence that HuR
directly interacts with mRNA in vivo. After heat shock, 12-15% of HuR accumulates
in discrete foci in the cytoplasm, but surprisingly the majority of HuR
crosslinks instead to nuclear poly(A)(+) RNA, whose levels are dramatically
increased in the stressed cells. This behavior of HuR differs from that of
another ARE-binding protein, hnRNP D, which has been implicated as an effector of
mRNA decay rather than mRNA stabilization and of the general pre-RNA-binding
protein hnRNP A1. We interpret these differences to mean that the temporal
association of HuR with ARE-containing mRNAs is different from that of these
other two proteins.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.97.7.3073 
PMCID: PMC16194
PMID: 10737787  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Genesis. 2000 Mar;26(3):213-24.

Differential expression of VEGF isoforms and VEGF(164)-specific receptor
neuropilin-1 in the mouse uterus suggests a role for VEGF(164) in vascular
permeability and angiogenesis during implantation.

Halder JB(1), Zhao X, Soker S, Paria BC, Klagsbrun M, Das SK, Dey SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, Ralph L. Smith Research
Center, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas 66160-7338, USA.

The mechanism(s) by which localized vascular permeability and angiogenesis occur 
at the sites of implantation is not clearly understood. Vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) is a key regulator of vasculogenesis during embryogenesis
and angiogenesis in adult tissues. VEGF is also a vascular permeability factor.
VEGF acts via two tyrosine kinase family receptors: VEGFR1 (Flt-1) and VEGFR2
(KDR/Flk-1). Recent evidence suggests that neuropilin-1 (NRP1), a receptor
involved in neuronal cell guidance, is expressed in endothelial cells, binds to
VEGF(165) and enhances the binding of VEGF(165) to VEGFR2. We examined the
spatiotemporal expression of vegf isoforms, nrp1 and vegfr2 as well as their
interactions in the periimplantation mouse uterus. We observed that vegf(164) is 
the predominant isoform in the mouse uterus. vegf(164) mRNA accumulation
primarily occurred in epithelial cells on days 1 and 2 of pregnancy. On days 3
and 4, the subepithelial stroma in addition to epithelial cells exhibited
accumulation of this mRNA. After the initial attachment reaction on day 5,
luminal epithelial and stromal cells immediately surrounding the blastocyst
exhibited distinct accumulation of vegf(164) mRNA. On days 6-8, the accumulation 
of this mRNA occurred in both mesometrial and antimesometrial decidual cells.
These results suggest that VEGF(164) is available in mediating vascular changes
and angiogenesis in the uterus during implantation and decidualization. This is
consistent with coordinate expression of vegfr2, and nrp1, a VEGF(164)-specific
receptor, in uterine endothelial cells. Their expression was low during the first
2 days of pregnancy followed by increases thereafter. With the initiation and
progression of implantation (days 5-8), these genes were distinctly expressed in 
endothelial cells of the decidualizing stroma. Expression was more intense on
days 6-8 at the mesometrial pole, the presumptive site of heightened angiogenesis
and placentation. However, the expression was absent in the avascular primary
decidual zone immediately surrounding the implanting embryo. Crosslinking
experiments showed that (125)I-VEGF(165) binds to both NRP1 and VEGFR2 present in
decidual endothelial cells. These results suggest that VEGF(164), NRP1 and VEGFR2
play a role in VEGF-induced vascular permeability and angiogenesis in the uterus 
required for implantation. genesis 26:213-224, 2000.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.


PMID: 10705382  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Cell Biol Int. 1999;23(8):561-70.

Microfilament-dependent modulation of cytoplasmic protein binding to TNFalpha
mRNA AU-rich instability element in human lymphoid cells.

Henics T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University Medical School
of Pécs, Szigeti u. 12, Pécs, H-7643, Hungary. THenics@INTERCELL.co.at

Cytoplasmic proteins with binding capability to AU-rich instability determinant
sequences (ARE) of tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha) mRNA 3' untranslated
region (3'UTR) were assessed in human lymphoid cells. In vitro label transfer
experiments using wild type as well as mutant sequences in which the 70
nucleotide-long AUUUA pentamer-containing portion of the 3'UTR had been deleted
conferred binding specificity to five major activities of 22/25-, 38/40-, 50-,
60- and 80-kDa proteins in cytoplasmic extracts of peripheral blood mononuclear
cells (PBMCs). Cytochalasin-induced disarrangement of the F-actin-based
microfilament system led to a Triton X-100-insoluble to soluble redistribution of
these binding activities. No such changes were observed in Jurkat tumour cells.
Combination of in vivo UV-crosslinking and in vitro label transfer experiments
revealed considerable differences in RNA association between proteins of the same
cell type as well as between proteins of identical molecular weight (Mw) derived 
from either PBMCs or Jurkat cells. Our findings may explain some aspects of
differential regulation of interleukin 2 (IL-2) and TNFalpha mRNA stability upon 
microfilament disruption in human PBMCs observed in an earlier study. These
results also suggest that the physical state of cytoplasmic structural
environment might contribute to important regulatory processes regarding key
elements of eukaryotic mRNA metabolism, such as modulation of stability. Finally,
these data highlight the possibility that the often observed disorganization of
the cytoskeleton in tumour cells may partly be responsible for the maintenance of
the neoplastic state, a phenomenon that potentially involves ARE-AUBP
interactions.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/cbir.1999.0418 
PMID: 10704240  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Nature. 1999 Dec 16;402(6763):838-41.

Inhibition of msl-2 splicing by Sex-lethal reveals interaction between U2AF35 and
the 3' splice site AG.

Merendino L(1), Guth S, Bilbao D, Martínez C, Valcárcel J.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Expression Programme, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg, 
Germany.

The protein Sex-lethal (SXL) controls dosage compensation in Drosophila by
inhibiting the splicing and translation of male-specific-lethal-2 (msl-2)
transcripts. Here we report that splicing inhibition of msl-2 requires a binding 
site for SXL at the polypyrimidine (poly(Y)) tract associated with the 3' splice 
site, and an unusually long distance between the poly(Y) tract and the conserved 
AG dinucleotide at the 3' end of the intron. Only this combination allows
efficient blockage of U2 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein particle binding and
displacement of the large subunit of the U2 auxiliary factor (U2AF65) from the
poly(Y) tract by SXL. Crosslinking experiments with ultraviolet light indicate
that the small subunit of U2AF (U2AF35) contacts the AG dinucleotide only when
located in proximity to the poly(Y) tract. This interaction stabilizes U2AF65
binding such that SXL can no longer displace it from the poly(Y) tract. Our
results reveal a novel function for U2AF35, a critical role for the 3' splice
site AG at the earliest steps of spliceosome assembly and the need for a weakened
U2AF35-AG interaction to regulate intron removal.

DOI: 10.1038/45602 
PMID: 10617208  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Methods Mol Biol. 1999;118:21-33.

RNA-protein crosslinking with photoreactive nucleotide analogs.

Hanna MM(1), Bentsen L, Lucido M, Sapre A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Oklahoma, Norman, USA.

DOI: 10.1385/1-59259-676-2:21 
PMID: 10549512  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


305. J Clin Invest. 1999 Nov;104(9):1265-75.

Defining a novel 75-kDa phosphoprotein associated with SS-A/Ro and identification
of distinct human autoantibodies.

Wang D(1), Buyon JP, Zhu W, Chan EK.

Author information: 
(1)W.M. Keck Autoimmune Disease Center, DNA Core Laboratory for Structural
Analysis, Department of Molecular Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, La
Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Mothers of children with neonatal lupus erythematosus (NLE) and heart block, as
well as patients with Sjögren's syndrome (SS) and systemic lupus erythematosus,
have serum autoantibodies that recognize SS-A/Ro autoantigens including the
60-kDa ribonucleoprotein. By yeast 2-hybrid screening, we identified a novel
75-kDa protein (pp75) that interacts with the carboxyl 70% of 60-kDa SS-A/Ro. The
specificity of interaction was confirmed using mammalian 2-hybrid and chemical
crosslinking studies. Immunoprecipitation with radiolabeled HeLa cell extracts
showed that pp75 was phosphorylated and associated with 2 other phosphoproteins
of 64 kDa. In Northern blot analysis, pp75 was expressed in all tissues analyzed;
the highest expression was in the human heart. Based on immunofluorescence of
transfected HeLa cells, pp75 is localized predominantly in the cytoplasm, an
observation confirmed by immunohistochemistry in untransfected cells. Based on
Western blot and ELISA assays, sera from 14 of 84 mothers of children with NLE
recognized pp75, including 1 mother in whom anti-SS-A/Ro antibodies were not
detected. In addition, sera from 5 of 80 patients with SS were positive for
anti-pp75 antibody. Identification of molecular partners is a first step toward
elucidating the functions and possible involvement in pathogenesis of
long-recognized autoantigens such as 60-kDa SS-A/Ro, which are at present poorly 
understood.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI8003 
PMCID: PMC409828
PMID: 10545525  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1999 Nov 15;371(2):179-90.

Identification and characterization of a cAMP-responsive element in the region
upstream from promoter 1.3 of the human aromatase gene.

Zhou D(1), Chen S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope,
Duarte, California 91010, USA.

Aromatase converts androgens to estrogens. The expression of this enzyme is
driven by multiple tissue-specific promoters which are differentially regulated. 
Aromatase expression in breast cancer and the surrounding adipose cells is
directed mainly by promoters I.3 and II, while its expression in the normal
breast adipose tissue is driven by promoter I.4. Like promoter II, promoters I.3 
is thought to be a cAMP-driven promoter, demonstrated previously by cell culture 
experiments. In the present study, we have identified and characterized a
cAMP-responsive element (CREaro) upstream from promoter 1.3. This positive
element, TGAAGTCA, between -66 and -59 bp relative to the transcriptional start
site of promoter 1.3 was identified by DNA deletion and mutation analyses. The
sequence of CREaro is one base different from the consensus CRE sequence (CREpal;
TGACGTCA), and the mutational analysis revealed that CREaro had a higher enhancer
activity to promoter I.3 than CREpal. Nuclear proteins from both WS3TF breast
tumor fibroblasts and SK-BR-3 breast cancer cells bound to this CREaro, as
demonstrated by DNA mobility shift assay. The molecular weight of the major
binding protein in fibroblasts was determined to be approximately 60 kDa, as
shown by UV crosslinking, which is different from those of known CRE-binding
proteins. It is thought that CREB1 is not expressed in tumor fibroblasts because 
the Western blot analysis using anti-CREB1 antibody was not able to detect CREB1 
in the nuclear protein extract from these cells. DNA mobility shift analysis
using a nuclear protein extract from SK-BR-3 cells revealed that at least two
proteins bound to the CREaro and that one of these proteins was identified to be 
CREB1. These studies provide direct evidence that promoter I.3 is a
cAMP-responsive promoter.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/abbi.1999.1454 
PMID: 10545204  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Virology. 1999 Nov 10;264(1):37-54.

Nucleocytoplasmic export of type D simian retrovirus genomic RNA: identification 
of important genetic subregions and interacting cellular proteins.

Li B(1), Wyman TE, Moudgil T, Marracci GH, Ju CF, Machida CA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neuroscience, Oregon Regional Primate Research Center, Beaverton, 
Oregon 97006, USA.

The simian retrovirus (SRV) genome contains a constitutive transport element
(CTE) within its 3' intergenic region (IR) that mediates the nuclear export of
unspliced SRV RNA. The serogroup 2 SRV CTE is predicted to form a stable
stem-loop structure containing two major internal loops exhibiting 180 degrees
inverse symmetry, with loop face sequences A, A', B, and B' and additional minor 
internal and terminal loops. To begin the identification of potential
CTE-interacting proteins and to assess structural requirements for protein
interaction, we conducted RNA mobility shift assays using IR fragments that
obliterated this region's known stable stem-loop structure. Using immunoblotting 
assays, we have determined that RNA helicase A, implicated in the nuclear export 
of unspliced SRV genomic RNA, does not appear to interact directly with either
the complete serogroup 2 SRV 3' IR or the subregion RNAs and that formation of
RNA-protein complexes is conferred by interaction with other novel proteins. UV
crosslinking of RNA-protein complexes, coupled with RNase T1/A digestion,
indicates that a novel protein of 120 kDa molecular weight interacts with the
complete CTE or with individual subregion RNAs. Transfection analyses indicate
that SRV recombinants containing A, A', B, or B' sequences forming the faces for 
two open loops undergo RNA export; only the complete sense CTE recombinant or a
second recombinant containing two subregions in sense orientation that
reconstitute the 3' two-thirds of the 3' IR, and contain only A' and B that form 
the faces for two terminal loops, are capable of SRV RNA export. These
experiments indicate that secondary structural determinants of the 3' IR and
multiple protein interactions may be important factors in the nuclear export of
unspliced SRV RNA.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/viro.1999.9938 
PMID: 10544128  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Cardiovasc Res. 1999 Jun;42(3):696-705.

Overexpression of long or short FGFR-1 results in FGF-2-mediated proliferation in
neonatal cardiac myocyte cultures.

Sheikh F(1), Fandrich RR, Kardami E, Cattini PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy and Cell Sciences, St. Boniface Hospital Research 
Centre, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: The type 1 fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR-1) is the only high
affinity receptor for fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF-2) in the rat myocardium,
and is essential for normal growth and development of the heart. Levels of FGFR-1
are developmentally regulated, being high in embryonic cardiac myocytes. Also,
FGFR-1 exists as both 'long' and 'short' isoforms, and there is a switch from
predominant expression of the 'long' isoform in the embryo to the 'short' isoform
in the adult heart. Both the decrease in receptor levels and the isoform switch
in postnatal cardiac myocytes correlate with a loss of proliferative potential.
We investigated whether an increase in either 'long' or 'short' FGFR-1 isoforms
could stimulate proliferation in postnatal rat cardiac myocyte cultures.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Previously we cloned cDNAs corresponding to 'long' (L) and
'short' (S) FGFR-1 isoforms from embryonic mouse hearts. Hybrid FGFR-1(L) and (S)
genes, directed by a myosin light chain-2 promoter and SV40 enhancer sequences,
were generated and used to transiently transfect neonatal rat cardiac myocytes.
Overexpression of FGFR-1 mRNA and protein was detected by RNA blotting and
immunocytochemistry. Ligand-crosslinking confirmed the presence of specific
receptors capable of binding FGF-2 on the cell membrane. Overexpression of either
FGFR-1(L) or (S) was associated with stimulation of proliferation as assessed by 
significant increases in bromodeoxyuridine uptake (DNA synthesis) and cell
number. To determine whether this response was FGF-2 specific, the level of FGF-2
was assessed in the culture medium of cardiac myocytes overexpressing FGFR-1
isoforms. A three-fold increase was detected in the media of cardiac myocytes
overexpressing either FGFR-1(L) or (S) compared to control levels. Neutralization
of this FGF-2 with antibodies inhibited the proliferative response.
CONCLUSION: Overexpression of either FGFR-1(L) or (S) resulted in an increase in 
FGF-2-mediated proliferation of postnatal rat cardiac myocytes.

DOI: 10.1016/s0008-6363(99)00008-5 
PMID: 10533610  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Genes Cells. 1999 Aug;4(8):475-85.

Two separate sequences of PB2 subunit constitute the RNA cap-binding site of
influenza virus RNA polymerase.

Honda A(1), Mizumoto K, Ishihama A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, National Institute of Genetics, Mishima,
Shizuoka 411-8540, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Influenza virus RNA polymerase with the subunit composition of
PB1-PB2-PA is a unique multifunctional enzyme with the activities of both
synthesis and cleavage of RNA, and is involved in both transcription and
replication of the RNA genome. Transcription is initiated by using capped RNA
fragments, which are generated after cleavage of host cell mRNA by the RNA
polymerase-associated capped RNA endonuclease. To identify the RNA cap 1-binding 
site on the RNA polymerase, viral ribonucleoprotein (RNP) cores were subjected to
UV-crosslinking with RNA which was labelled with 32P only at the cap-1 structure.
RESULTS: After SDS-PAGE of UV-crosslinked cores, 32P was found to be associated
only with the PB2 subunit (759 amino acid residues). The labelled PB2 was
subjected, together with PB2 expressed in E. coli, to limited digestion with V8
protease. Analysis of the amino terminal sequences of some isolated fragments
with the crosslinked cap-1 indicated that two separate sequences within the PB2
were involved in RNA cap-1 binding, one (N-site) at the N-terminal proximal
region approximately between amino acid residues 242-282 downstream from the PB1 
subunit-binding site and the other (C-site) between residues 538-577 including
the cap-binding motifs. Two lines of evidence support the prediction of the
involvement of two separate PB2 sequences on the RNA cap-binding: (i)
cross-linking of the capped RNA on to expressed and isolated PB2 fragments, each 
containing either the N-site or the C-site; and (ii) competition of capped
RNA-binding to PB2 by both of the N- and C-terminal PB2 fragments. Taking
together, we propose that two separate sequences within PB2 constitute the capped
RNA-binding site of the RNA polymerase.
CONCLUSION: Two separate sequences, one N-(242-282) and the other C-terminal
(538-577) proximal segments of PB2 subunit, constitute the RNA cap-binding site
of the influenza virus RNA polymerase.


PMID: 10526235  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Nature. 1999 Jul 15;400(6741):284-8.

The chromatin-specific transcription elongation factor FACT comprises human SPT16
and SSRP1 proteins.

Orphanides G(1), Wu WH, Lane WS, Hampsey M, Reinberg D.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry, University of
Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School,
Piscataway 08854, USA.

The regulation of gene expression depends critically upon chromatin structure.
Transcription of protein-coding genes can be reconstituted on naked DNA with only
the general transcription factors and RNA polymerase II. This minimal system
cannot transcribe DNA packaged into chromatin, indicating that accessory factors 
may facilitate access to DNA. Two classes of accessory factor, ATP-dependent
chromatin-remodelling enzymes and histone acetyltransferases, facilitate
transcription initiation from chromatin templates. FACT (for facilitates
chromatin transcription) is a chromatin-specific elongation factor required for
transcription of chromatin templates in vitro. Here we show that FACT comprises a
new human homologue of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae Spt16/Cdc68 protein and the
high-mobility group-1-like protein structure-specific recognition protein-1.
Yeast SPT16/CDC68 is an essential gene that has been implicated in transcription 
and cell-cycle regulation. Consistent with our biochemical analysis of FACT, we
provide evidence that Spt16/Cdc68 is involved in transcript elongation in vivo.
Moreover, FACT specifically interacts with nucleosomes and histone H2A/H2B
dimers, indicating that it may work by promoting nucleosome disassembly upon
transcription. In support of this model, we show that FACT activity is abrogated 
by covalently crosslinking nucleosomal histones.

DOI: 10.1038/22350 
PMID: 10421373  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Exp Hematol. 1999 Jul;27(7):1168-75.

NF-kappaB involvement in the activation of primary adult T-cell leukemia cells
and its clinical implications.

Arima N(1), Matsushita K, Obata H, Ohtsubo H, Fujiwara H, Arimura K, Kukita T,
Suruga Y, Wakamatsu S, Hidaka S, Tei C.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Kagoshima
University, Sakuragaoka, Japan. nao@med6.kufm.kagoshima-u.ac.jp

The HTLV-I provirus-encoded Tax protein induces NF-kappaB in Tax-transfected
Jurkat T cells or HTLVL-I- infected T cells in vitro. Tax induction of NF-kappaB 
is presumed to be involved in proliferation and activation of primary leukemia
cells in vivo. Recent studies have demonstrated that NF-kappaB activities in
human T cells are mediated by at least four c-Rel-related DNA binding proteins - 
p50, p55, p75 and p85. We examined the significance of NF-kappaB induction in
primary adult T cell leukemia cells and the induction kinetics of each of the
four NF-kappaB species. Marked NF-kappaB activity was detected using an
electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) in the primary cells of patients with
acute disease, but little activity was noted in the cells of chronic patients.
NF-kappaB activity was enhanced in a time-dependent manner in acute type cells
cultured with mitogen-free medium; there was no induction of activity in chronic 
type cells. UV crosslinking demonstrated all four species of NFkappaB complex -
high levels of p50 and lower levels of p55 and p75, in acute type cells; chronic 
type cells showed only the p50. As a control, normal resting T cells similarly
showed only p50; control cells showed little change in activity when cultured
without mitogenic stimulation, analogous to chronic type ATL. Northern blotting
revealed enhancement of c-rel (encoding p85) and KBFI (encoding p50 and p55)
expression in acute type cells during culture, while there was no significant
enhancement of mRNAs in chronic type ATL cells or unstimulated normal T cells.
Northern blotting also revealed that Tax is upregulated at the mRNA level in
acute- but not chronic-type cells during culture. Expression of c-rel and KBF1
mRNAs in acute type cells appeared to be related to Tax mRNA expression. These
results suggest that Tax is capable of inducing nuclear expression of all four
NF-kappaB species in primary ATL cells of acute type patients, with marked
effects on p55, p75, and p85. Tax induction of NF-kappaB species is regulated, at
least in part, at a pretranslational level involving increases in c-rel and KBF1 
mRNA.


PMID: 10390192  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Nature. 1999 Jun 10;399(6736):605-9.

Enhancement of TBP binding by activators and general transcription factors.

Li XY(1), Virbasius A, Zhu X, Green MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Program in Molecular Medicine, University of 
Massachusetts Medical Center, Worcester 01605, USA.

Eukaryotic transcriptional activators function, at least in part, by promoting
assembly of the preinitiation complex, which comprises RNA polymerase II and its 
general transcription factors (GTFs). Activator-mediated stimulation of the
assembly of the preinitiation complex has been studied in vitro but has been
relatively refractory to in vivo analysis. Here we use a
DNA-crosslinking/immunoprecipitation assay to study in living cells the first
step in the assembly of the preinitiation complex, the interaction between the
TATA-box-binding protein (TBP) and its binding site, the TATA box. Analysis of a 
variety of endogenous yeast genes, and of a series of activators of differing
strength, reveals a general correlation between TBP binding and transcriptional
activity. Using mutant yeast strains, we show that Mot1 prevents the binding of
TBP to inactive promoters and that activator-mediated stimulation of TBP binding 
requires additional GTFs, including TFIIB and Srb4. Taken together, our results
indicate that TBP binding in vivo is stringently controlled, and that the ability
of activators to stimulate this step in the assembly of the preinitiation complex
is a highly cooperative process involving multiple transcription factors.

DOI: 10.1038/21232 
PMID: 10376604  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Neoplasma. 1999;46(1):50-3.

Crosslinking of cellular DNA by nitracrine and furocoumarin derivatives.

Studzian K(1), Tołwińska-Stańczyk Z, Wilmańska D, Palumbo M, Gniazdowski M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Chemistry, Institute of Physiology and Biochemistry,
Medical University of Lódź, Poland.

The anticancer drug, nitracrine, a 1-nitro-9-aminoalkyl derivative of acridine
exhibits potent cytotoxic effects which are due to its metabolic activation,
followed by covalent binding to macromolecules--DNA being the target for the
drug. The renaturable fraction of DNA from L-1210 cells pretreated with
nitracrine is assayed by means of ethidium bromide fluorescence assay and
chromatography on hydroxyapatite column. The effect of the drug was compared with
furocoumarins of different DNA crosslinking potencies. The existence of
crosslinks in DNA upon incubation of cells with nitracrine (1-4 microM) have been
confirmed with two different methods under the conditions where
8-methoxypsoralen, a classic crosslinking agent induced the renaturation. The DNA
preparation isolated from the drug pretreated cells exhibited decreased
transcriptional template activity with E. coli DNA-dependent RNA polymerase.


PMID: 10355534  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


314. FEBS Lett. 1999 Apr 30;450(1-2):131-4.

Interaction of the p70 subunit of RPA with a DNA template directs p32 to the
3'-end of nascent DNA.

Kolpashchikov DM(1), Weisshart K, Nasheuer HP, Khodyreva SN, Fanning E, Favre A, 
Lavrik OI.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Siberian Division of Russian Academy of
Sciences, Novosibirsk.

Human replication protein A is a heterotrimeric protein involved in various
processes of DNA metabolism. To understand the contribution of replication
protein A individual subunits to DNA binding, we have expressed them separately
as soluble maltose binding protein fusion proteins. Using a DNA construct that
had a photoreactive group incorporated at the 3'-end of the primer strand, we
show that the p70 subunit on its own is efficiently cross-linked to the primer at
physiological concentrations. In contrast, crosslinking of the p32 subunit
required two orders of magnitude higher protein concentrations. In no case was
the p14 subunit labelled above background. p70 seems to be the predominant
subunit to bind single-stranded DNA and this interaction positions the p32
subunit to the 3'-end of the primer.

DOI: 10.1016/s0014-5793(99)00484-6 
PMID: 10350071  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


315. RNA. 1999 Mar;5(3):378-94.

Exonic splicing enhancers contribute to the use of both 3' and 5' splice site
usage of rat beta-tropomyosin pre-mRNA.

Selvakumar M(1), Helfman DM.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, New York 11724-2208, USA.

The rat beta-tropomyosin gene encodes two tissue-specific isoforms that contain
the internal, mutually exclusive exons 6 (nonmuscle/smooth muscle) and 7
(skeletal muscle). We previously demonstrated that the 3' splice site of exon 6
can be activated by introducing a 9-nt polyuridine tract at its 3' splice site,
or by strengthening the 5' splice site to a U1 consensus binding site, or by
joining exon 6 to the downstream common exon 8. Examination of sequences within
exons 6 and 8 revealed the presence of two purine-rich motifs in exon 6 and three
purine-rich motifs in exon 8 that could potentially represent exonic splicing
enhancers (ESEs). In this report we carried out substitution mutagenesis of these
elements and show that some of them play a critical role in the splice site usage
of exon 6 in vitro and in vivo. Using UV crosslinking, we have identified SF2/ASF
as one of the cellular factors that binds to these motifs. Furthermore, we show
that substrates that have mutated ESEs are blocked prior to A-complex formation, 
supporting a role for SF2/ASF binding to the ESEs during the commitment step in
splicing. Using pre-mRNA substrates containing exons 5 through 8, we show that
the ESEs within exon 6 also play a role in cooperation between the 3' and 5'
splice sites flanking this exon. The splicing of exon 6 to 8 (i.e., 5' splice
site usage of exon 6) was enhanced with pre-mRNAs containing either the
polyuridine tract in the 3' splice site or consensus sequence in the 5' splice
site around exon 6. We show that the ESEs in exon 6 are required for this effect.
However, the ESEs are not required when both the polyuridine and consensus splice
site sequences around exon 6 were present in the same pre-mRNA. These results
support and extend the exon-definition hypothesis and demonstrate that sequences 
at the 3' splice site can facilitate use of a downstream 5' splice site. In
addition, the data support the hypothesis that ESEs can compensate for weak
splice sites, such as those found in alternatively spliced exons, thereby
providing a target for regulation.

DOI: 10.1017/s1355838299981050 
PMCID: PMC1369767
PMID: 10094307  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


316. DNA Cell Biol. 1999 Jan;18(1):39-49.

Cytoplasmic proteins interact with a translational control element in the
protein-coding region of proopiomelanocortin mRNA.

Spencer CM(1), Eberwine J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia 19104-6084, USA.

Previous studies have indicated that proopiomelanocortin (POMC) is
translationally regulated. We proposed that the regulatory mechanism involves an 
interaction between trans-acting protein factors and a cis-acting stem-loop
structure in the coding region of POMC mRNA. Functional interactions were tested 
by examining the translation of mouse POMC mRNA in a rabbit reticulocyte system. 
Specific binding was demonstrated with ultraviolet-crosslinking and RNA gel
mobility shift assays. The evidence presented supports our hypothesis that the
translational regulation of POMC gene expression involves recognition of the
stem-loop by RNA-binding proteins. Furthermore, POMC stem-loop RNA-binding
proteins specifically recognized a predicted stem-loop found in the coding region
of corticotropin-releasing hormone, suggesting a novel mechanism of gene
regulation that may extend to other neuropeptides as well.

DOI: 10.1089/104454999315600 
PMID: 10025507  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


317. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1999 Feb;288(2):613-9.

Acetyl-11-keto-beta-boswellic acid induces apoptosis in HL-60 and CCRF-CEM cells 
and inhibits topoisomerase I.

Hoernlein RF(1), Orlikowsky T, Zehrer C, Niethammer D, Sailer ER, Simmet T,
Dannecker GE, Ammon HP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Department of Pharmacology, Tuebingen,
Germany.rrhoernl@med.uni-tuebingen.de

Antiproliferative action of different pentacyclic triterpenes has repeatedly been
reported, and some lipoxygenase inhibitors have been shown to induce cell death
in various cell systems. Acetyl-11-keto-beta-boswellic acid (AKBA) is a
pentacyclic triterpene that inhibits 5-lipoxygenase in a selective,
enzymedirected, nonredox, and noncompetitive manner. To investigate a possible
effect of AKBA on leukemic cell growth, proliferation of HL-60 and CCRF-CEM cells
was assayed in the presence of AKBA and a structural analog without effect on
5-lipoxygenase, amyrin. Cell counts and [3H]thymidine incorporation were
significantly reduced in a dose-dependent manner in the presence of AKBA (IC50 = 
30 microM) but not amyrin. An additive effect of AKBA with the crosslinking of
the CD95 receptor was also observed. Flow cytometric analysis of propidium
iodide-stained cells indicated that the cells underwent apoptosis. This was
confirmed by flow cytometric detection of sub-G1 peaks in AKBA-treated cells and 
by DNA laddering. However, because HL-60 and CCRF-CEM do not express
5-lipoxygenase mRNA constitutively, a mechanism distinct from inhibition of
5-lipoxygenase must account for the effect of AKBA. In a DNA relaxation assay
with phiX174RF DNA, AKBA inhibited topoisomerase I from calf thymus at
concentrations of >/=10 microM. A semiquantitative cDNA polymerase chain reaction
approach was used to estimate the relative level of expression of topoisomerases 
in both cell lines. The data suggest that induction of apoptosis in HL-60 and
CCRF-CEM by AKBA may be due to inhibition of topoisomerase I in these cells.


PMID: 9918566  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


318. RNA. 1999 Jan;5(1):117-30.

Coordinate repression of a trio of neuron-specific splicing events by the
splicing regulator PTB.

Zhang L(1), Liu W, Grabowski PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
15260, USA.

In this study, we demonstrate the ability of the polypyrimidine tract binding
protein PTB to function as a coordinator of splicing regulation for a trio of
neuron-specific exons that are subject to developmental splicing changes in the
rat cerebellum. Three neuron-specific exons that show positive regulation are
derived from the GABA(A) receptor gamma2 subunit 24 nucleotide exon, clathrin
light chain B exon EN, and N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor NR1 subunit exon 5
pre-mRNAs. The functional activity of splicing repressor signals located in the
3' splice site regions adjacent to the neural exons is shown using an alternative
splicing switch assay, in which these short RNA sequences function in trans to
switch splicing to the neural pathway in HeLa splicing reactions. Parallel UV
crosslinking/competition assays demonstrate selective binding of PTB in
comparison to substantially lower binding at adjacent, nonneural 3' splice sites.
Substantially lower PTB binding and splicing switch activity is also observed for
the 3' splice site of NMDA exon 21, which is subject to negative regulation in
cerebellum tissue in the same time frame. In splicing active neural extracts, the
balance of control shifts to positive regulation, and this shift correlates with 
a PTB status that is predominantly the neural form. In this context, the addition
of recombinant PTB is sufficient to switch splicing to the nonneural pathway. The
neural extracts also reveal specific binding of the CUG triplet repeat binding
protein to a subset of regulatory 3' splice site regions. These interactions may 
interfere with PTB function or modulate splicing levels in a substrate-specific
manner within neural tissue. Together these results strengthen the evidence that 
PTB is a splicing regulator with multiple targets and demonstrate its ability to 
discriminate among neural and nonneural substrates. Thus, a variety of mechanisms
that counterbalance the splicing repressor function of PTB in neural tissue are
capable of mediating developmental splicing control. Altered expression of PTB
isoforms during cerebellar development, as documented by Western blot analysis,
is proposed to be a contributing mechanism.

DOI: 10.1017/s1355838299981530 
PMCID: PMC1369744
PMID: 9917071  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Dec 22;95(26):15212-7.

Protein component of the ribozyme ribonuclease P alters substrate recognition by 
directly contacting precursor tRNA.

Niranjanakumari S(1), Stams T, Crary SM, Christianson DW, Fierke CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Box 3711, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, 
NC 27710, USA.

The protein component of ribonuclease P (RNase P) binds to the RNA subunit,
forming a functional ribonucleoprotein complex in vivo and enhancing the affinity
of the precursor tRNA (pre-tRNA) substrate. Photocrosslinking experiments with
pre-tRNA bound to RNase P reconstituted with the protein component of Bacillus
subtilis ribonuclease P (P protein) site specifically modified with a
crosslinking reagent indicate that: (i) the central cleft of P protein directly
interacts with the single-stranded 5' leader sequence of pre-tRNA, and (ii) the
orientation and register of the pre-tRNA leader sequence in the central cleft
places the protein component in close proximity to the active site. This unique
mode of interaction suggests that the catalytic active site in RNase P occurs
near the interface of RNA and protein. In contrast to other ribonucleoprotein
complexes where the protein mainly stabilizes the active tertiary fold of the
RNA, a critical function of the protein component of RNase P is to alter
substrate specificity and enhance catalytic efficiency.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.95.26.15212 
PMCID: PMC28022
PMID: 9860948  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


320. RNA. 1998 Dec;4(12):1675-86.

Protein-RNA interactions in the U5 snRNP of Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Dix I(1), Russell CS, O'Keefe RT, Newman AJ, Beggs JD.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell and Molecular Biology, University of Edinburgh, United
Kingdom.

Corrected and republished from
    RNA. 1998 Oct;4(10):1239-50.

We present here the first insights into the organization of proteins on the RNA
in the U5 snRNP of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Photo-crosslinking with uniformly
labeled U5 RNA in snRNPs reconstituted in vitro revealed five contacting
proteins, Prp8p, Snu114p, p30, p16, and p10, contact by the three smaller
proteins requiring an intact Sm site. Site-specific crosslinking showed that
Snu114p contacts the 5' side of internal loop 1, whereas Prp8p interacts with
five different regions of the 5' stem-loop, but not with the Sm site or 3'
stem-loop. Both internal loops in the 5' domain are essential for Prp8p to
associate with the snRNP, but the conserved loop 1 is not, although this is the
region to which Prp8p crosslinks most strongly. The extensive contacts between
Prp8p and the 5' stem-loop of U5 RNA support the hypothesis that, in
spliceosomes, Prp8p stabilizes loop 1-exon interactions. Moreover, data showing
that Prp8p contacts the exons even in the absence of loop 1 indicate that Prp8p
may be the principal anchoring factor for exons in the spliceosome. This and the 
close proximity of the spliceosomal translocase, Snu114p, to U5 loop 1 and Prp8p 
support and extend the proposal that Snu114p mimics U5 loop 1 during a
translocation event in the spliceosome.

DOI: 10.1017/s1355838298412998 
PMCID: PMC1369734
PMID: 9848662  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


321. RNA. 1998 Nov;4(11):1373-85.

Neighborhood of 16S rRNA nucleotides U788/U789 in the 30S ribosomal subunit
determined by site-directed crosslinking.

Mundus D(1), Wollenzien P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, North Carolina State University, Raleigh
27695-7622, USA.

Site-specific photo crosslinking has been used to investigate the RNA
neighborhood of 16S rRNA positions U788/ U789 in Escherichia coli 30S subunits.
For these studies, site-specific psoralen (SSP) which contains a sulfhydryl group
on a 17 A side chain was first added to nucleotides U788/U789 using a
complementary guide DNA by annealing and phototransfer. Modified RNA was purified
from the DNA and unmodified RNA. For some experiments, the SSP, which normally
crosslinks at an 8 A distance, was derivitized with azidophenacylbromide (APAB)
resulting in the photoreactive azido moiety at a maximum of 25 A from the 4'
position on psoralen (SSP25APA). 16S rRNA containing SSP, SSP25APA or control 16S
rRNA were reconstituted and 30S particles were isolated. The reconstituted
subunits containing SSP or SSP25APA had normal protein composition, were active
in tRNA binding and had the usual pattern of chemical reactivity except for
increased kethoxal reactivity at G791 and modest changes in four other regions.
Irradiation of the derivatized 30S subunits in activation buffer produced several
intramolecular RNA crosslinks that were visualized and separated by gel
electrophoresis and characterized by primer extension. Four major crosslink sites
made by the SSP reagent were identified at positions U561/U562, U920/U921, C866
and U723; a fifth major crosslink at G693 was identified when the SSP25APA
reagent was used. A number of additional crosslinks of lower frequency were seen,
particularly with the APA reagent. These data indicate a central location close
to the decoding region and central pseudoknot for nucleotides U788/U789 in the
activated 30S subunit.

DOI: 10.1017/s1355838298981134 
PMCID: PMC1369710
PMID: 9814758  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


322. DNA Cell Biol. 1998 Sep;17(9):751-9.

Identification of human autoantigen La/SS-B as BC1/BC200 RNA-binding protein.

Kremerskothen J(1), Nettermann M, op de Bekke A, Bachmann M, Brosius J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Experimental Pathology, Center for Molecular Biology of
Inflammation, University of Münster, Germany.

Rodent BC1 RNA and primate BC200 RNA are small cytoplasmic non-messenger RNAs
that are phylogenetically unrelated. Nevertheless, the two RNAs exhibit a large
degree of parallelism. In addition to some sequence similarities in their 3'
domains, they are prevalently expressed in a similar subset of neurons and belong
to a small group of transcripts with a somatodendritic location. Both RNAs are
complexed with proteins as ribonucleoprotein particles (RNPs). Their similarities
may even extend to analogous functional roles, for example, in the regulation of 
decentralized dendritic translation. To shed further light on the physiological
role(s) of the BC1/BC200 RNPs, we began to analyze protein components that
specifically bind to these RNAs. Ultraviolet-crosslinking experiments and
affinity purification techniques revealed that the human autoantigen La/SS-B is
associated with BC1/BC200 RNA in vitro and in vivo. As with other RNA polymerase 
III transcripts, La protein binds with high affinity to the 3' end of BC200 RNA. 
Our results suggest that an additional function of La may be control of dendritic
translation by providing a link between the 5' Alu domain of BC200 RNP and the
ribosome via the La protein dimer. The fact that La binds both BC1 and BC200 RNAs
further supports the notion that the RNAs are functional analogs despite the fact
that they arose from two separate retroposition events in two different mammalian
lineages.

DOI: 10.1089/dna.1998.17.751 
PMID: 9778034  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Nucleic Acids Res. 1998 Nov 1;26(21):4965-74.

A specific RNA-protein interaction at yeast polyadenylation efficiency elements.

Chen S(1), Hyman LE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tulane University School of Medicine, 1430 Tulane 
Avenue, New Orleans,LA 70112-2699, USA.

The specific RNA-protein interactions responsible for the production of mature 3'
ends of eukaryotic mRNAs are not well understood. Sequence elements at the 3'
ends of yeast genes have been identified that specify the position of the poly(A)
site and the efficiency of polyadenylation. To provide additional insights into
the interaction between important sequences that direct 3'-end formation in vivo 
and nuclear proteins, we utilized gel mobility shift assays and UV-crosslinking
studies. The data indicate that a protein, with an apparent molecular weight of
80 kDa, interacts specifically with pre-mRNA at the (UA)3efficiency element.
Although the interaction is specific, it can be competed by RNA sequences that do
not contain the same type of efficiency element; that is, a sequence lacking a
(UA)3repeat. This result implies that the protein binding site is flexible. Using
immunoprecipitation techniques, the protein has been identified as Hrp1, a
heteronuclear RNA binding protein. The role of Hrp1p in 3'-end formation
including RNA processing and transcription termination is addressed.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/26.21.4965 
PMCID: PMC147941
PMID: 9776761  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


324. EMBO J. 1998 Oct 1;17(19):5844-52.

RNA-dependent activation of primer RNA production by influenza virus polymerase: 
different regions of the same protein subunit constitute the two required
RNA-binding sites.

Li ML(1), Ramirez BC, Krug RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Rutgers University,
Piscataway, NJ 08855, USA.

The capped RNA primers required for the initiation of influenza virus mRNA
synthesis are produced by the viral polymerase itself, which consists of three
proteins PB1, PB2 and PA. Production of primers is activated only when the 5'-
and 3'-terminal sequences of virion RNA (vRNA) bind sequentially to the
polymerase, indicating that vRNA molecules function not only as templates for
mRNA synthesis but also as essential cofactors which activate catalytic
functions. Using thio U-substituted RNA and UV crosslinking, we demonstrate that 
the 5' and 3' sequences of vRNA bind to different amino acid sequences in the
same protein subunit, the PB1 protein. Mutagenesis experiments proved that these 
two amino acid sequences constitute the functional RNA-binding sites. The 5'
sequence of vRNA binds to an amino acid sequence centered around two arginine
residues at positions 571 and 572, causing an allosteric alteration which
activates two new functions of the polymerase complex. In addition to the PB2
protein subunit acquiring the ability to bind 5'-capped ends of RNAs, the PB1
protein itself acquires the ability to bind the 3' sequence of vRNA, via a
ribonucleoprotein 1 (RNP1)-like motif, amino acids 249-256, which contains two
phenylalanine residues required for binding. Binding to this site induces a
second allosteric alteration which results in the activation of the endonuclease 
that produces the capped RNA primers needed for mRNA synthesis. Hence, the PB1
protein plays a central role in the catalytic activity of the viral polymerase,
not only in the catalysis of RNA-chain elongation but also in the activation of
the enzyme activities that produce capped RNA primers.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/17.19.5844 
PMCID: PMC1170912
PMID: 9755184  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Sep 15;95(19):11134-9.

Existence of distinct tyrosylprotein sulfotransferase genes: molecular
characterization of tyrosylprotein sulfotransferase-2.

Beisswanger R(1), Corbeil D, Vannier C, Thiele C, Dohrmann U, Kellner R, Ashman
K, Niehrs C, Huttner WB.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics, Dresden,
Germany.

Tyrosylprotein sulfotransferase (TPST) is a 54- to 50-kDa integral membrane
glycoprotein of the trans-Golgi network found in essentially all tissues
investigated, catalyzing the tyrosine O-sulfation of soluble and membrane
proteins passing through this compartment. Here we describe (i) an approach to
identify the TPST protein, referred to as MSC (modification after substrate
crosslinking) labeling, which is based on the crosslinking of a substrate peptide
to TPST followed by intramolecular [35S]sulfate transfer from the cosubstrate
3'-phosphoadenosine 5'-phosphosulfate (PAPS); and (ii) the molecular
characterization of a human TPST, referred to as TPST-2, whose sequence is
distinct from that reported [TPST-1; Ouyang, Y.-B., Lane, W. S. & Moore, K. L.
(1998) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95, 2896-2901] while this study was in
progress. Human TPST-2 is a type II transmembrane protein of 377 aa residues that
is encoded by a ubiquitously expressed 1.9-kb mRNA originating from seven exons
of a gene located on chromosome 22 (22q12.1). A 304-residue segment in the
luminal domain of TPST-2 shows 75% amino acid identity to the corresponding
segment of TPST-1, including conservation of the residues implicated in the
binding of PAPS. Expression of the TPST-2 cDNA in CHO cells resulted in an
approximately 13-fold increase in both TPST protein, as determined by MSC
labeling, and TPST activity. A predicted 359-residue type II transmembrane
protein in Caenorhabditis elegans with 45% amino acid identity to TPST-2 in a
257-residue segment of the luminal domain points to the evolutionary conservation
of the TPST protein family.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.95.19.11134 
PMCID: PMC21608
PMID: 9736702  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Sep 15;95(19):11122-7.

A novel yeast protein influencing the response of RNA polymerase II to
transcriptional activators.

Emili A(1), Kobayashi R, Ingles CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Banting and Best Department of Medical Research and Department of Molecular
and Medical Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada M5G 1L6.

A sensitive in vitro crosslinking technique using a photoactive derivative of the
chimeric activator LexA-E2F-1 was used to identify yeast proteins that might
influence the response of RNA polymerase II to transcriptional activators. We
found that a novel yeast protein, Xtc1p, could be covalently crosslinked to the
activation domain of LexA-E2F-1 when this derivatized activator was bound to DNA 
upstream of an activator-responsive RNA polymerase II promoter. Because affinity 
chromatography experiments showed that Xtc1p also bound directly and specifically
to the activation domains of E2F-1, the viral activator VP16, and the yeast
activator Gal4p and copurified with the RNA polymerase II holoenzyme complex,
Xtc1p may modulate the response of RNA polymerase II to multiple activators.
Consistent with this notion, yeast strains deleted for the XTC1 gene exhibited
pleiotropic growth defects, including temperature sensitivity, galactose
auxotrophy, and a heightened sensitivity to activator overexpression, as well as 
an altered response to transcriptional activators in vivo.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.95.19.11122 
PMCID: PMC21606
PMID: 9736700  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1998 May 11;1397(3):285-94.

Psoralen crosslinking of active and inactive sea urchin histone and rRNA genes.

Jasinskas A(1), Jasinskiene N, Langmore JP.

Author information: 
(1)Biophysics Research Division and Department of Biology, University of
Michigan, 930 N. University, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1055, USA.

Chromatin structure is highly correlated with the transcriptional activity of
specific genes. For example, it has been found that the regularity of nucleosome 
spacing is compromised when genes are transcribed. The rRNA genes from fungi,
plants, and animals give distinctly bimodal distributions of psoralen
crosslinking, which has led to the suggestion that these genes might be largely
devoid of nucleosomes when transcriptionally active. We investigated the
chromatin structure of the multicopy rRNA and histone genes during sea urchin
early embryogenesis. The rRNA genes, which are weakly expressed, give a unimodal 
distribution of weak psoralen crosslinking, in contrast to the situation in all
other organisms studied. The early histone genes were more accessible to psoralen
crosslinking when active than inactive. The pattern of crosslinking suggests that
these polII genes have a homogeneous structure and are still highly protected by 
nucleosomes when in the active conformation, unlike the situation in polI genes.

DOI: 10.1016/s0167-4781(98)00017-7 
PMID: 9582439  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Nucleic Acids Res. 1998 Jun 15;26(12):2989-94.

Down regulation of extramacrochaetae mRNA by a Drosophila neural RNA binding
protein Rbp9 which is homologous to human Hu proteins.

Park SJ(1), Yang ES, Kim-Ha J, Kim YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Center for Basic Research, Samsung
Biomedical Research Institute, Ilwon-dong 50, Kangnam-ku, Seoul 135-230, Korea.

Rbp9 is an RNA binding protein expressed mainly in the central nervous system of 
adult Drosophilamelanogaster. Rbp9 shares a high degree of sequence similarity
with human neural proteins referred to as Hu antigens. Hu antigens bind to U-rich
mRNA destabilizing elements with a high affinity and, thus, have been implicated 
as regulators of mRNA stability. Using in vitro RNA binding assays, we found that
Rbp9 binds strongly to poly U sequences. We then employed a Selex system to
identify a consensus Rbp9 binding site (UUUXUUUU). Information obtained from the 
Selex results allowed the detection of two repeats of the Rbp9 consensus binding 
sequence in the 3' untranslated region of extramacrochaetae mRNA. UV crosslinking
experiments demonstrated that Rbp9 interactsspecifically with emc mRNA. The
requirement of Rbp9 protein in the down regulation of emc mRNA was confirmed by
northern (RNA) analysis, which revealed that the level of emc mRNA increased
10-fold in rbp9 mutant flies. Taken together with the in vitro RNA binding
results, the genetic evidence obtained strongly supports the hypothesis that Rbp9
functions as a regulator of RNA stability.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/26.12.2989 
PMCID: PMC147648
PMID: 9611245  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Nucleic Acids Res. 1998 Jun 1;26(11):2541-53.

Distinct regions of U3 snoRNA interact at two sites within the 5' external
transcribed spacer of pre-rRNAs in Trypanosoma brucei cells.

Hartshorne T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology A-10, Albany Medical College,
47 New Scotland Avenue, Albany, NY 12208, USA.
toinette_hartshorne@ccgateway.amc.edu

U3 snoRNA is required for early pre-rRNA processing events that include cleavage 
of the 5' external transcribed spacer (5'ETS) and 18S rRNA maturation. Herein,
psoralen RNA crosslinking has been used to indicate novel in vivo interactions
between the minimally-sized Trypanosoma brucei U3 snoRNA and pre-rRNAs. Two
discrete U3 crosslinks were mapped to 5'ETS sequences, then individually isolated
by hybrid selection following digestion of pre-rRNAs. Crosslink positions within 
these U3-site1 and U3-site2 complexes were resolved by RNaseH digestion and
primer extension analyses. Hinge bases of U3 contacted site1 bases U140 and U142 
just 3' of the processed primary site. This is the first experimental evidence of
a U3 RNA interaction adjacent to a major 5'ETS cleavage site and supports a
critical role for U3 in its processing. Highly conserved box A bases contacted
site2 base U945, 187 nt upstream of 18S-like rRNA sequences. Site2 sequences are 
not required for primary processing, thus, a U3 interaction here might have roles
in subsequent downstream processing events. These results clearly demonstrated
that distinct U3 snoRNA sequences crosslinked different regions of the 5'ETS and 
support a model for U3 as a multifunctional snoRNA.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/26.11.2541 
PMCID: PMC147592
PMID: 9592135  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Mar 31;95(7):3396-401.

Linker histone protects linker DNA on only one side of the core particle and in a
sequence-dependent manner.

An W(1), Leuba SH, van Holde K, Zlatanova J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Oregon State University, Corvallis,
OR 97331-7305, USA.

The protection against micrococcal nuclease digestion afforded to chromatosomal
DNA by the presence of a linker histone (H1(o)) has been quantitatively measured 
in two reconstituted systems. We have used chromatosomes reconstituted at two
distinct positions on a DNA fragment containing the 5S rRNA gene from Lytechinus 
variegatus and at a specific position on a sequence containing Gal4- and
USF-binding sites. In all cases, we find asymmetric protection, with
approximately 20 bp protected on one side of the core particle and no protection 
on the other. We demonstrated through crosslinking experiments that the result is
not due to any sliding of the histone core caused by either linker histone
addition or micrococcal nuclease cleavage. Because the core particle is itself a 
symmetric object, the preferred asymmetric location of a linker histone must be
dictated by unknown elements in the DNA sequence.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.95.7.3396 
PMCID: PMC19847
PMID: 9520377  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


331. RNA. 1998 Feb;4(2):151-66.

Domain 5 binds near a highly conserved dinucleotide in the joiner linking domains
2 and 3 of a group II intron.

Podar M(1), Zhuo J, Zhang M, Franzen JS, Perlman PS, Peebles CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology & Oncology, University of Texas, Southwestern 
Medical Center, Dallas 75235-9148, USA.

Photocrosslinking has identified the joiner between domains 2 and 3 [J(23)] as
folding near domain 5 (D5), a highly conserved helical substructure of group II
introns required for both splicing reactions. D5 RNAs labeled with the
photocrosslinker 4-thiouridine (4sU) reacted with highly conserved nucleotides
G588 and A589 in J(23) of various intron acceptor transcripts. These conjugates
retained some ribozyme function with the lower helix of D5 crosslinked to J(23), 
so they represent active complexes. One partner of the gamma x gamma' tertiary
interaction (A587 x U887) is also in J(23); even though gamma x gamma' is
involved in step 2 of the splicing reaction, D5 has not previously been found to 
approach gamma x gamma'. Similar crosslinking patterns between D5 and J(23) were 
detected both before and after step 1 of the reaction, indicating that the lower 
helix of D5 is positioned similarly in both conformations of the active center.
Our results suggest that the purine-rich J(23) strand is antiparallel to the D5
strand containing U32 and U33. Possibly, the interaction with J(23) helps
position D5 correctly in the ribozyme active site; alternatively, J(23) itself
might participate in the catalytic center.


PMCID: PMC1369604
PMID: 9570315  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Nucleic Acids Res. 1998 Mar 15;26(6):1466-72.

Transcription coupled nucleotide excision repair by isolated Escherichia coli
membrane-associated nucleoids.

ClGL(1), Kovalsky O, Grossman L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The Johns Hopkins University, School of Hygiene
and Public Health, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Erratum in
    Nucleic Acids Res 1998 Jun 15;26(12):following 3075.

One form of nucleotide excision repair (NER) is known to be functionally coupled 
to transcription, but the nature of this functional link in Escherichia coli is
still unclear. Here we have employed the isolated membrane-associated nucleoids
from E.coli to examine this issue. We show that the isolated nucleoid fraction is
capable of excision of UV-induced pyrimidine dimers when reconstituted with a
cytoplasmic fraction resolved by sucrose gradient fractionation. This excision
activity by UvrABC is sensitive to rifampicin and is dependent on transcription. 
By using crosslinking and immunoprecipitation, the damage recognition protein,
UvrA, was found to be specifically associated with the RNA polymerase beta
subunit on the chromosomal DNA independent of DNA damage. It suggests that at
least in one of the NER pathways the search for damage may be directly linked to 
RNA polymerase. In addition, the role of transcription in the unfolding of the
nucleoid structure to allow repair enzymes to gain access to the damaged DNA is
described. This study provides insight into the understanding of the
transcription-repair coupling in vivo.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/26.6.1466 
PMCID: PMC147428
PMID: 9490793  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Nucleic Acids Res. 1998 Mar 15;26(6):1421-6.

Survey of four different photoreactive moieties for DNA photoaffinity labeling of
yeast RNA polymerase III transcription complexes.

Tate JJ(1), Persinger J, Bartholomew B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Southern Illinois
University at Carbondale, Carbondale, IL 62901-4413, USA.

In order to optimize the detection of protein-DNA contacts by DNA photoaffinity
labeling, we attached four different photoreactive groups to DNA and examined
their ability to crosslink yeast RNA polymerase III (Pol III) transcription
complexes. Photoreactive nucleotides containing an aryl azide (AB-dUMP),
benzophenone (BP-dUMP), perfluorinated aryl azide (FAB-dUMP) or diazirine
(DB-dUMP) coupled to 5-aminoallyl deoxyuridine were incorporated into the SUP4
tRNATyr gene at bp -3/-2 or +11. Photo-crosslinking with diazirine revealed
contacts of Pol III with DNA that are not detected by DNA photoaffinity labeling 
using an aryl azide, fluorinated aryl azide or benzophenone group attached to
DNA. These novel contacts were of the 82 kDa subunit of Pol III with DNA at bp
-3/-2 in the initiation complex and of the 82, 40(37) and 31 kDa subunits of Pol 
III with DNA at bp +11 in elongation complexes stalled at bp +17. These results
provide evidence for the subcomplex of the 82, 34 and 31 kDa subunits of Pol III 
being positioned near the transcription bubble of actively transcribing Pol III, 
as all three proteins were crosslinked at bp +11 of the stalled transcription
complex.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/26.6.1421 
PMCID: PMC147414
PMID: 9490787  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Mech Dev. 1998 Jan;70(1-2):77-89.

Sea urchin ovoperoxidase: oocyte-specific member of a heme-dependent peroxidase
superfamily that functions in the block to polyspermy.

LaFleur GJ Jr(1), Horiuchi Y, Wessel GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Brown
University, Providence, RI 02912, USA. gary_lafleur_jr@brown.edu

Ovoperoxidase is one of several oocyte-specific proteins that are stored within
sea urchin cortical granules, released during the cortical reaction, and
incorporated into the newly formed fertilization envelope. Ovoperoxidase plays a 
particularly important role in this process, crosslinking the envelope into a
hardened matrix that is insensitive to biochemical and mechanical challenges and 
thus providing a permanent block to polyspermy. Here we present the primary
structures of two ovoperoxidases as predicted from cDNAs cloned from the sea
urchins Strongylocentrotus purpuratus (AF035380) and Lytechinus variegatus
(AF035381). We also present a proposed scheme for the post-translational
processing of ovoperoxidase based upon comparisons between the cDNA and protein
structures and taking into account previously published reports. The sea urchin
ovoperoxidase sequences conform to a profile shared by members of a
heme-dependent animal peroxidase family, including the mammalian myelo-, lacto-, 
eosinophil, and thyroid peroxidases. Using in situ RNA hybridizations, we showed 
that the mRNA of S. purpuratus ovoperoxidase (4 kb) is present exclusively in
oocytes, and is turned over rapidly following germinal vesicle breakdown. Taking 
into account our immunoblot and N-terminal sequencing data along with reports
from similar peroxidases, we propose that ovoperoxidases are synthesized in a
pre-pro form and proteolytically processed to result in the 70 and 50 kDa forms
that are found in the fertilization envelope. The sequence and structural data
presented here will facilitate our continuing studies of the biogenesis of
cortical granules and the fertilization envelope. Additionally, since
ovoperoxidase activities have been reported in a wide range of animals, these
cDNAs will be useful in uncovering similar peroxidases used in the fertilization 
reactions of other metazoan eggs.

DOI: 10.1016/s0925-4773(97)00178-0 
PMID: 9510026  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Biol Chem. 1998 Jan;379(1):51-8.

Overexpression and structural characterization of the phage T4 protein DsbA.

Sieber P(1), Lindemann A, Boehm M, Seidel G, Herzing U, van der Heusen P, Müller 
R, Rüger W, Jaenicke R, Rösch P.

Author information: 
(1)Lehrstuhl für Struktur und Chemie der Biopolymere, Universität Bayreuth,
Germany.

The double strand binding protein A (DsbA) of bacteriophage T4 is one of several 
viral gene products participating in transcriptional regulation. These proteins
interact or associate with the host RNA polymerase core enzyme, enabling the
enzyme to successively initiate transcription at different classes of viral
promoters: early, middle and late. This leads to a temporally controlled
expression of the T4 gene products. The DsbA binding site overlaps the late
promoter region, and DsbA binding seems to intensify transcription of late genes 
in vitro, possibly acting as an enhancer protein (Molecular Biology of Phage T4, 
Karam, 1994). To further investigate the function and structure of DsbA, we
overexpressed the protein in E. coli and purified it to homogeneity.
Physiological functionality of the recombinant protein was shown by gel
retardation experiments and by circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy. DsbA shows
strong bands in the near UV-CD spectra. The far UV-CD spectroscopy analysis shows
alpha-helices to be the main secondary structure elements. This is in agreement
with secondary structure predictions. A possible helix-turn-helix motif in the
center of the protein could be identified. Results from crosslinking and
sedimentation analyses show that DsbA forms a dimer in solution. The thermal
unfolding curve fits a dimer-two-state-folding-model, and the unfolding
temperature was concentration dependent. Therefore, dimerization should supply
the main portion of the free energy of stabilization of deltaG0 = 42 kJ/mol.


PMID: 9504717  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Nucleic Acids Res. 1998 Feb 15;26(4):954-60.

Translational termination in Escherichia coli: three bases following the stop
codon crosslink to release factor 2 and affect the decoding efficiency of
UGA-containing signals.

Poole ES(1), Major LL, Mannering SA, Tate WP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Centre for Gene Research, University of Otago, 
PO Box 56, Dunedin, New Zealand.

The observations that the Escherichia coli release factor 2 (RF2) crosslinks with
the base following the stop codon (+4 N), and that the identity of this base
strongly influences the decoding efficiency of stop signals, stimulated us to
determine whether there was a more extended termination signal for RF2
recognition. Analysis of the 3' contexts of the 1248 genes in the E.coli genome
terminating with UGA showed a strong bias for U in the +4 position and a general 
bias for A and against C in most positions to +10, consistent with the concept of
an extended sequence element. Site-directed crosslinking occurred to RF2 from a
thio-U sited at the +4, +5 and +6 bases following the UGA stop codon but not
beyond (+7 to +10). Varying the +4 to +6 bases modulated the strength of the
crosslink from the +1 invariant U to RF2. A strong selection bias for particular 
bases in the +4 to +6 positions of certain E. coli UGANNN termination sites
correlated in some cases with crosslinking efficiency to RF2 and in vivo
termination signal strength. These data suggest that RF2 may recognise at least a
hexanucleotide UGA-containing sequence and that particular base combinations
within this sequence influence termination signal decoding efficiency.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/26.4.954 
PMCID: PMC147352
PMID: 9461453  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Biochem J. 1998 Jan 15;329 ( Pt 2):255-64.

Functional role for the angiotensin II receptor (AT1A) 3'-untranslated region in 
determining cellular responses to agonist: evidence for recognition by RNA
binding proteins.

Thekkumkara TJ(1), Thomas WG, Motel TJ, Baker KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, C281, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center,
4200 East Ninth Avenue, Denver, CO 80262, USA.

We demonstrate a functional role for the 3'-untranslated region (3'-UTR) of the
angiotensin II (Ang II) receptor subtype AT1A mRNA in Chinese hamster ovary
(CHO-K1) cells by stably transfecting the coding region of the receptor gene with
or without the 845 bp 3'-UTR. Two cell lines expressing similar levels of
cell-surface receptors (with 3'-UTR, Bmax=571 fmol/mg protein; without 3'-UTR,
Bmax=663 fmol/mg protein) were used in the present study. Both cell lines
expressed high-affinity receptors (with 3'-UTR, Kd=0.83 nM; without 3'-UTR,
Kd=0.82 nM), and binding studies with 125I-labelled Ang II in the presence of
GTP[S] demonstrated that both coupled to heterotrimeric G-proteins. Despite these
similarities, significant differences were observed for receptor-mediated cell
signalling pathways. In cells without the 3'-UTR, Ang II stimulated an increase
in cAMP accumulation (11-fold above control) and in cells with the 3'-UTR no
stimulation was observed, which was consistent with previous observations in most
endogenous Ang II receptor (AT1)-expressing cells. Activation of cAMP by Ang II
in cells without the 3'-UTR correlated with an inhibition of DNA synthesis,
determined by [3H]thymidine incorporation. Ang II-mediated responses were blocked
by EXP3174, a selective non-peptide receptor antagonist. We also observed
differences in the transient profiles of intracellular calcium between cells with
and without the 3'-UTR in response to Ang II. In cells with the 3'-UTR, a
sustained level of intracellular calcium was observed after Ang II stimulation,
whereas cells without the 3'-UTR displayed a full return to basal level within 50
s of Ang II treatment. Even though the expressed exogenous gene is under the
control of a constitutively expressing promoter (cytomegalovirus promoter),
Northern-blot analysis revealed a considerably greater accumulation of AT1A mRNA 
in cells without the 3'-UTR compared with cells with the 3'-UTR. Analysis of the 
decay rate of the AT1A mRNA in cells with and without the 3'-UTR revealed that
the normally unstable AT1A receptor mRNA became highly stable by removing its
3'-UTR, identifying a role for the 3'-UTR in mRNA destabilization. Interestingly,
both cells express similar levels of receptors at the cell surface, suggesting
that the 3'-UTR is also involved in the efficient translation and/or
translocation of the receptor protein to the plasma membrane. We hypothesized
that these 3'-UTR-mediated functions of the receptor are regulated by RNA-binding
proteins. To identify possible RNA-binding proteins for the AT1A 3'-UTR, cellular
extracts were prepared from parental CHO-K1 cells and 3'-UTR-binding assays,
electrophoretic mobility-shift assays and UV crosslinking studies were performed.
A major cellular protein of 55 kDa was identified, which specifically interacted 
with the 3'-UTR. Our data suggest that the 3'-UTR of the AT1A can control
specific receptor functions, perhaps via selective recognition of the 3'-UTR by
RNA-binding proteins.

DOI: 10.1042/bj3290255 
PMCID: PMC1219039
PMID: 9425107  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


338. J Cell Sci. 1998 Jan;111 ( Pt 1):121-9.

In vivo association of lamins with nucleic acids in Drosophila melanogaster.

Rzepecki R(1), Bogachev SS, Kokoza E, Stuurman N, Fisher PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacological Sciences, University Medical Center at Stony
Brook, State University of New York at Stony Brook, Stony Brook, NY 11794-8651,
USA.

A 32P-labeling strategy was developed to study the interaction(s) in tissue
culture cells between proteins and nucleic acids. Interphase and mitotic nuclear 
lamins were studied in Drosophila Kc cells. After bromodeoxyuridine incorporation
and in vivo photo-crosslinking with 366 nm light, it was found that interphase
lamins were associated with nucleic acid. Interactions with DNA as well as RNA
were detected. In contrast, interaction of nucleic acids with mitotic lamin was
not observed. Photo-crosslinking in the presence of antibiotics distamycin and/or
chromomycin suggested that interphase lamins interacted with both A-T-rich DNA
and G-C-rich DNA; interactions with G-C-rich DNA predominated. These results have
implications for understanding the interphase organization of the higher
eukaryotic cell nucleus as well as the transition of cells from interphase to
mitosis. A model of nuclear organization, consistent with our results, is
proposed.


PMID: 9394018  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Mol Reprod Dev. 1997 Dec;48(4):471-9.

Alternative splicing converts the G-protein coupled follitropin receptor gene
into a growth factor type I receptor: implications for pleiotropic actions of the
hormone.

Sairam MR(1), Jiang LG, Yarney TA, Khan H.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Reproduction Research Laboratory, Clinical Research Institute of
Montreal, Quebec, Canada. sairamm@IRCM.UMontreal.CA

Pituitary follitropin (FSH) has pleiotropic actions on gonads, but it is not
certain if all these events are mediated by a single receptor. A single gene for 
the FSH receptor undergoes extensive alternate splicing generating multiple
transcripts, and several of these have been cloned and characterized from the
sheep testis. In this study we have investigated the expression in HEK (human
embryonic kidney) 293 cells of a cloned cDNA encoding the first eight exons of
the FSH receptor along with a carboxyterminal extension that contributed a
hypothetical single transmembrane domain. This cDNA, which lacked the
conventional seven transmembrane motif of the full-length 695 residue wild-type
receptor protein, was also efficiently expressed on the cell surface and
exhibited high affinity and specificity for FSH binding. LH did not compete for
FSH binding indicating that these structures contained all the motifs necessary
for specific hormone recognition. Following hormone binding and affinity
crosslinking the deduced M(r) of the expressed receptor was compatible with dimer
formation. The expression of these altered FSH receptors on the cell surface was 
confirmed by immunohistochemistry, which revealed punctate labeling in a pattern 
comparable to that shown by cells transfected by wild-type receptor cDNA.
Addition of FSH stimulated 3H-thymidine incorporation in transfected cells in a
biphasic manner. By performing RT-PCR we could show that similar altered receptor
transcripts were present in both the ovary and testis. Our results reveal for the
first time that the seven transmembrane structure of FSH-receptor is not
absolutely necessary for cell surface expression and hormone binding provided
other compensating motifs are present in the protein structure for membrane
insertion. Some of these features are typical of growth factor receptors. Our
investigations also demonstrate that alternate splicing of the FSH receptor gene 
provides a mechanism for creating receptor diversity and suggest that multiple
receptors could be involved in regulation of hormone action.

DOI: 10.1002/(SICI)1098-2795(199712)48:4<471::AID-MRD7>3.0.CO;2-N 
PMID: 9364441  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


340. J Biochem. 1997 Sep;122(3):627-34.

Identification of two nucleotide-binding domains on the PB1 subunit of influenza 
virus RNA polymerase.

Asano Y(1), Ishihama A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, National Institute of Genetics, Mishima,
Shizuoka.

Influenza virus RNA polymerase is a multifunctional and multisubunit enzyme
consisting of three viral P proteins, PB1, PB2, and PA. We have previously shown 
that radioactive 8-azido GTP (8-N3 GTP) was photo-crosslinked specifically to the
PB1 subunit. Here we confirmed the specific crosslinking of PB1 using oxidized
GTP and further identified the GTP analogue binding domains after proteolytic
cleavage of the crosslinked PB1 with V8 protease. The cleavage pattern of PB1 was
determined by analysis of the amino-terminal proximal sequence of fragments
generated in the presence of increasing concentrations of V8 protease. The
GTP-crosslinking was identified in three fragments: two adjacent fragments, P6
starting from residue 179 and Pllb starting from residue 298; and the third
fragment, P11c, starting from residue 458. Thus, we propose that two GTP-binding 
sites exist in the PB1 subunit, i.e., the amino terminal-proximal site I located 
at the boundary between P6 and Pllb, and the carboxy terminal proximal site II on
P11c fragment. The locations of GTP-binding sites I and II are close to those of 
sequence motif A and motif D, respectively, conserved among RNA-dependent RNA
polymerases. Of the two fragments forming site I, the crosslinking of 8-N3 GTP is
higher to P11b, while that of oxidized GTP is higher to P6, suggesting that the
ribose and guanine moieties of GTP bound in this binding pocket face P6 and P11c,
respectively. From the V8 concentration dependent change in proteolytic cleavage 
pattern, it is likely that the two GTP-binding sites on PB1 protein are located
on structurally different domains. The existence of two GTP-binding sites is
discussed in relation to the binding sites for substrates, primers, and products.

DOI: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.jbchem.a021799 
PMID: 9348094  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


341. J Bacteriol. 1997 Sep;179(18):5812-9.

Alterations within the activation domain of the sigma 54-dependent activator DctD
that prevent transcriptional activation.

Wang YK(1), Hoover TR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Georgia, Athens 30602, USA.

Rhizobium meliloti DctD (C4-dicarboxylate transport protein D) is a
transcriptional activator that catalyzes the ATP-dependent isomerization of
closed complexes between sigma 54-RNA polymerase holoenzyme and the dctA promoter
to open complexes. Following random mutagenesis of dctD, 55 independent mutant
forms of DctD that failed to activate transcription from a dctA'-'lacZ reporter
gene in Escherichia coli were selected, and the amino acid substitutions were
determined for these mutant proteins. Amino acid substitutions were distributed
throughout the central domain of the protein, the domain responsible for
transcription activation, but most of the substitutions occurred within three
highly conserved regions of the protein. Selected mutant proteins were purified, 
and their activities were studied in vitro. All of the purified mutant proteins
appeared to have normal DNA-binding activity and interacted with sigma 54 and
core RNA polymerase, as determined from protein crosslinking assays. Proteins
with amino acid substitutions in a region spanning amino acid positions 222 to
225 retained their ATPase activities, whereas proteins with substitutions in
other regions had little or no ATPase activity. Taken together, these data
suggest that the region that encompasses amino acid residues 222 through 225
probably functions in coupling the energy released from ATP hydrolysis to open
complex formation rather than as a major determinant for binding to RNA
polymerase.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.179.18.5812-5819.1997 
PMCID: PMC179471
PMID: 9294439  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Sep 16;94(19):10155-60.

In vitro properties of the first ORF protein from mouse LINE-1 support its role
in ribonucleoprotein particle formation during retrotransposition.

Kolosha VO(1), Martin SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Structural Biology, Box B-111, University of
Colorado School of Medicine, 4200 East Ninth Avenue, Denver, CO 80262, USA.

LINEs are transposable elements, widely distributed among eukaryotes, that move
via reverse transcription of an RNA intermediate. Mammalian LINEs have two ORFs
(ORF1 and ORF2). The proteins encoded by these ORFs play important roles in the
retrotransposition process. Although the predicted amino acid sequence of ORF1 is
not closely related to any known proteins, it is highly basic; thus, it has long 
been hypothesized that ORF1 protein functions to bind LINE-1 (L1) RNA during
retrotransposition. Cofractionation of ORF1 protein and L1 RNA in extracts from
both mouse and human embryonal carcinoma cells indicated that ORF1 protein binds 
L1 RNA, forming a ribonucleoprotein particle. Based on UV crosslinking and
electrophoretic mobility-shift assays using purified components, we demonstrate
here that the ORF1 protein encoded by mouse L1 binds nucleic acids with a strong 
preference for RNA and other single-stranded nucleic acids. Furthermore, multiple
copies of ORF1 protein appear to bind single-stranded nucleic acid in a manner
suggesting positive cooperativity; such binding characteristics are likely to be 
facilitated by the protein-protein interactions detected among molecules of ORF1 
polypeptide by coimmunoprecipitation. These observations are consistent with the 
formation of ribonucleoprotein particles containing L1 RNA and ORF1 protein and
provide additional evidence for the role of ORF1 protein during
retrotransposition of L1.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.94.19.10155 
PMCID: PMC23331
PMID: 9294179  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


343. RNA. 1997 Sep;3(9):1068-79.

Boundary of pRNA functional domains and minimum pRNA sequence requirement for
specific connector binding and DNA packaging of phage phi29.

Garver K(1), Guo P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907, 
USA.

Bacteriophage phi29 utilizes a viral-encoded 120-base RNA (pRNA) to accomplish
dsDNA packaging into a preformed procapsid. Six pRNAs bind to the procapsid and
work sequentially. The pRNA contains two functional domains, one for binding to
the DNA translocating connector, and the other for interacting with another
component of the DNA packaging machinery during DNA translocation. By UV
crosslinking, the pRNA was found to bind to the connector specifically and not to
the capsid or scaffolding proteins. When purified connectors were incubated with 
pRNA, rosette-like connector oligomers were observed. These oligomers were found 
to contain pRNA. A series of deletion mutants of the pRNA were constructed and
their ability to perform various tasks involved in phi29 assembly were assayed.
The minimum sizes of the pRNA needed for the following activities have been
determined: (1) specific binding to procapsid or to connectors; (2) connector or 
procapsid binding with full efficiency compared with wild-type pRNA; and (3)
genomic DNA packaging. In summary, bases 37-91 (55 nt) comprised the minimum
sequence required for specific connector binding, although with lower efficiency;
bases 6-113 (105 nt with the additional deletion of two nonessential bases, C109 
and A106) comprised the minimum sequence required for full connector binding
activity; and bases 1-117 comprised the minimum sequence needed for full DNA
packaging activity. These data indicate clearly that the helical region composed 
of bases 1-6 and 113-117 plays a crucial role in DNA translocation, but is
dispensable for connector binding. A model for the role of the pRNA in DNA
packaging was also presented.


PMCID: PMC1369551
PMID: 9292504  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


344. RNA. 1997 Sep;3(9):1028-36.

Photoaffinity labeling of 30S-subunit proteins S7 and S11 by
4-thiouridine-substituted tRNA(Phe) situated at the P site of Escherichia coli
ribosomes.

Rosen KV(1), Zimmerman RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, University of Massachusetts,
Amherst 01003-4505, USA.

4-Thiouridine, a photoreactive analogue of uridine, was randomly incorporated
into yeast tRNA(Phe) precursor molecules by transcription with T7 RNA polymerase 
and the resulting transcripts were converted into mature tRNA(Phe) by treatment
with RNase P RNA. The photoreactive tRNA(Phe) was aminoacylated and bound to the 
P site of Escherichia coli 70S ribosomes in the presence of a poly(U) template.
Irradiation of the complexes with light of 300 nm resulted in the covalent
crosslinking of nt U20 in the D loop of the tRNA to protein S11 of the 30S
ribosomal subunit, whereas nt U33 in the anticodon loop crosslinked to
30S-subunit protein S7. These results allowed us to map the D loop of P
site-bound tRNA to the platform of the 30S ribosomal subunit and provided
additional information about contacts between protein S7 and the anticodon loop
in the cleft between the platform and the subunit head.


PMCID: PMC1369548
PMID: 9292501  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


345. RNA. 1997 Sep;3(9):974-82.

Decoding the translational termination signal: the polypeptide chain release
factor in Escherichia coli crosslinks to the base following the stop codon.

Poole ES(1), Brimacombe R, Tate WP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Centre for Gene Research, University of Otago, 
Dunedin, New Zealand.

Protein release factors act like tRNA analogues in decoding translational stop
signals. Statistical analysis of the sequences at translational stop sites and
functional studies with particular signals indicate this mimicry involves an
increase in the length of the signal in the mRNA. The base following the stop
codon (+4 base) is of particular interest because it has a strong influence on
the competitiveness of the stop signal at recoding sites, suggesting it might
form part of the release factor recognition element. Site-directed crosslinking
from the +4 base showed that it is in close proximity to the Escherichia coli
release factor-2 in a termination complex, a prerequisite for the +4 base being
part of the recognition element. Fingerprinting analysis indicates that
crosslinking to the release factor occurred from both +1 and +4 positions of the 
stop signal in the same RNA molecule. This provides more evidence that the +4
base may be an integral part of the decoding signature in the mRNA during the
termination phase of protein biosynthesis.


PMCID: PMC1369544
PMID: 9292497  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Aug 5;94(16):8433-8.

Preferential interaction of the his pause RNA hairpin with RNA polymerase beta
subunit residues 904-950 correlates with strong transcriptional pausing.

Wang D(1), Severinov K, Landick R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology and Biomedical Sciences, Washington University, St. Louis,
MO 63130, USA.

RNA secondary structures (hairpins) that form as the nascent RNA emerges from RNA
polymerase are important components of many signals that regulate transcription, 
including some pause sites, all rho-independent terminators, and some
antiterminators. At the his leader pause site, a 5-bp-stem, 8-nt-loop pause RNA
hairpin forms 11 nt from the RNA 3' end and stabilizes a transcription complex
conformation slow to react with NTP substrate. This stabilization appears to
depend at least in part on an interaction with RNA polymerase. We tested for RNA 
hairpin interaction with the paused polymerase by crosslinking 5-iodoUMP
positioned specifically in the hairpin loop. In the paused conformation, strong
and unusual crosslinking of the pause hairpin to beta904-950 replaced
crosslinking to beta' and to other parts of beta that occurred in nonpaused
complexes prior to hairpin formation. These changes in nascent RNA interactions
may inhibit reactive alignment of the RNA 3' end in the paused complex and be
related to events at rho-independent terminators.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.94.16.8433 
PMCID: PMC22946
PMID: 9237994  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Biotechniques. 1997 Jul;23(1):60-2.

Determination of molecular weights of nucleic acid-binding proteins by UV
photo-crosslinking and SDS-PAGE.

Bourbonniére M(1), Shekarabi M, Nalbantoglu J.

Author information: 
(1)McGill University Montreal, QC, Canada.

DOI: 10.2144/97231bm11 
PMID: 9232228  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Nucleic Acids Res. 1997 Jun 15;25(12):2266-73.

A new technique for the characterization of long-range tertiary contacts in large
RNA molecules: insertion of a photolabel at a selected position in 16S rRNA
within the Escherichia coli ribosome.

Baranov PV(1), Dokudovskaya SS, Oretskaya TS, Dontsova OA, Bogdanov AA,
Brimacombe R.

Author information: 
(1)A. N. Belozersky Institute of Physico-Chemical Biology and Department of
Chemistry, Moscow State University, Moscow 119899, Russia.

A new approach for inserting a photo-label at a selected position within the long
ribosomal RNA molecules has been developed. The Escherichia coli 16S rRNA was
cleaved at a single internucleotide bond, 1141-1142, with RNase H in the presence
of a complementary chimeric oligonucleotide. 4-Thiouridine 5', 3'-diphosphate was
ligated to the 3'-end of the 5'fragment at the cleavage site with T4 RNA ligase. 
The 16S rRNA fragments containing this added photo-reactive nucleotide were
assembled together with total 30S ribosomal proteins into small ribosomal
subunits. The ability of such 30S particles containing fragmented rRNA to form
70S ribosomes has been demonstrated previously. Crosslinks were induced within
the 30S subunits by mild UV irradiation. The sites of crosslinking within the 16S
rRNA were then analyzed using RNase H digestion and reverse transcription. Two
crosslinks from the thio-nucleotide attached to nt C1141 of 16S rRNA were
observed, namely to nt U1295 and G1272. These results are in agreement with the
established proximity of helix 39 and 41 in the 3D structure of the 30S ribosomal
subunit, as shown by other intra RNA crosslinking data. These data furthermore
allow us to refine the structural arrangement of helices 41 and 39 relative to
one another.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/25.12.2266 
PMCID: PMC146764
PMID: 9171076  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Jun 10;94(12):6346-51.

CD27, a member of the tumor necrosis factor receptor family, induces apoptosis
and binds to Siva, a proapoptotic protein.

Prasad KV(1), Ao Z, Yoon Y, Wu MX, Rizk M, Jacquot S, Schlossman SF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Tumor Immunology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 44 Binney Street, 
Boston, MA 02120, USA.

Members of the tumor necrosis factor receptor (TNFR) superfamily are important
for cell growth and survival. In addition to providing costimulatory signals for 
cell proliferation, ligation of both TNFR1 and Fas can result in programmed cell 
death or apoptosis. The underlying mechanism requires an intact 80-aa stretch
present in the cytoplasmic tails of both TNFR1 and Fas, termed the death domain
(DD). Here we show that CD27, a member of the TNFR family, expressed on discrete 
subpopulations of T and B cells and known to provide costimulatory signals for T 
and B cell proliferation and B cell Ig production, can also induce apoptosis.
Co-crosslinking of surface Ig receptors along with ligation of CD27 augments
CD27-mediated apoptosis. Unlike TNFR1 and Fas, the cytoplasmic tail of CD27 is
relatively short and lacks the DD. Using the yeast two-hybrid system, we have
cloned a novel protein (Siva) that binds to the CD27 cytoplasmic tail. It has a
DD homology region, a box-B-like ring finger, and a zinc finger-like domain.
Overexpression of Siva in various cell lines induces apoptosis, suggesting an
important role for Siva in the CD27-transduced apoptotic pathway.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.94.12.6346 
PMCID: PMC21052
PMID: 9177220  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


350. RNA. 1997 Jun;3(6):602-12.

Exact determination of UV-induced crosslinks in 16S ribosomal RNA in 30S
ribosomal subunits.

Wilms C(1), Noah JW, Zhong D, Wollenzien P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, North Carolina State University, Raleigh
27695-7622, USA.

Erratum in
    RNA 1997 Aug;3(8):945.

Escherichia coli 30S ribosomal subunits were UV-irradiated to induce
intramolecular crosslinks in the 16S rRNA. Intact 16S rRNA was purified and
subjected to gel electrophoresis, under denaturing conditions, to separate
molecules on the basis of the crosslinked loop size. Molecules separated this way
were enriched for specific crosslinks and could be analyzed by the reverse
transcription arrest assay to determine exact crosslinking sites. Thirteen
crosslinking sites have been identified at single nucleotide resolution. Of
these, eight are within or adjacent to secondary structure elements: one of these
(C582 x G760) involves an interaction between nucleotides within an interior
loop, one (C1402 x X1501) involves an interaction between nucleosides in adjacent
base pairs, and the others involve interactions between nucleotides that are
within junction regions (A441 x G494, U562 x U884, C934 x U1345, and U991 x
U1212) or are interactions between nucleotides (C54 x A353 and U1052 x C1200)
that somehow cross known base pairs. Five other crosslinks connect sites distant 
in the secondary structure and provide global constraints for the arrangement of 
RNA regions within RNA domains I and II (U244 x G894, G894 x A1468, C967 x C1400)
and within domain III (U1126 x C1281 and A1093 x G1182). These crosslinks, known 
at single-nucleotide resolution, are useful in the prediction of local RNA
regions, as well as the global structure.


PMCID: PMC1369509
PMID: 9174095  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


351. J Neurochem. 1997 Jun;68(6):2587-92.

Site-directed deletion of a 10-nucleotide domain of the 3'-untranslated region of
the GLUT1 glucose transporter mRNA eliminates cytosolic protein binding in human 
brain tumors and induction of reporter gene expression.

Tsukamoto H(1), Boado RJ, Pardridge WM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Brain Research Institute, UCLA School of Medicine, 
Los Angeles, California 90095-1682, U.S.A.

The posttranscriptional regulation of GLUT1 glucose transporter gene expression
may be mediated by specific interactions between cytosolic trans-acting factors
and regulatory cis-elements within the 3'-untranslated regions (UTRs) of the
GLUT1 mRNA. Recent studies demonstrate that experimental and human brain tumors
express an 80-kDa protein that reacts with a specific sequence around nucleotide 
2,200 within the GLUT1 mRNA 3'-UTR. The 80-kDa protein is selectively expressed
in hemangioblastoma, a tumor characterized by overexpression of GLUT1. The
enhancer role of this GLUT1 3'-UTR cis-element was confirmed in the present
studies using the luciferase expression vector pGL2 and site-directed deletion.
Transfection of C6 glioma cells with pGL2 (containing nucleotides 2,100-2,300 of 
the bovine GLUT1 3'-UTR inserted at the Pfl MI site within the luciferase 3'-UTR)
results in a fivefold increase in luciferase gene expression. Deletion of
nucleotides 2,181-2,190 of the bovine GLUT1 3'-UTR, i.e., the putative binding
site of the 80-kDa protein, completely eliminated the enhancement of luciferase
activity in the transfected cells. Luciferase mRNA containing the putative
cis-element inserted in the 3'-UTR was transcribed, and after UV crosslinking,
this mRNA complexed with the 80-kDa protein in cytosol of either C6 cells or
hemangioblastoma. In contrast, this complex was undetected with either luciferase
control mRNA or 10 nucleotide-deleted RNA. The present study provides evidence
that nucleotides 2,181-2,190 of the bovine GLUT1 mRNA 3'-UTR forms a complex with
brain tumor cytosolic proteins that serves to increase GLUT1 gene expression at
the posttranscriptional level.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1471-4159.1997.68062587.x 
PMID: 9166756  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Genomics. 1997 May 15;42(1):115-25.

Plectin transcript diversity: identification and tissue distribution of variants 
with distinct first coding exons and rodless isoforms.

Elliott CE(1), Becker B, Oehler S, Castañón MJ, Hauptmann R, Wiche G.

Author information: 
(1)Vienna Biocenter, Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Cell Biology,
University of Vienna, Austria.

Plectin is a widely expressed protein that is very large in size and that has all
the attributes of a multifunctional crosslinking and organizing element of the
cytoskeleton. It displays a multidomain structure, versatile binding activities, 
and subcellular localizations that enable it to strengthen cells against
mechanical stress forces. Moreover, hereditary gene defects in plectin cause
epidermolysis bullosa simplex (EBS)-MD, a severe skin blistering disease with
muscular dystrophy. Here we report the analysis of the exonintron organization of
the rat plectin gene and the identification of several different isoforms on the 
transcriptional level. We show that of 35 coding exons identified, 4 serve as
alternative first exons splicing into the same successive exon 2, which is the
first of 7 exons encoding a highly conserved actin-binding domain. RNase
protection mapping of transcripts containing 3 of the identified 4 alternate
first exons revealed their coexpression in rat glioma C6 cells and in a series of
different rat tissues that we examined. Significant variations in expression
levels of first exons indicated the possibility of tissue-specific promoter
usage. In addition, plectin splice variants lacking exon 31 (> 3 kb), which
encodes the entire rod domain of the molecule, were identified in a variety of
rat tissues. This study provides first insights into a complex plectin gene
regulatory machinery with similarities to that of dystrophin.

DOI: 10.1006/geno.1997.4724 
PMID: 9177781  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Prostate. 1997 May 15;31(3):183-92.

Neurotensin receptor expression in prostate cancer cell line and growth effect of
NT at physiological concentrations.

Seethalakshmi L(1), Mitra SP, Dobner PR, Menon M, Carraway RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Massachusetts Medical Center,
Worcester 01655, USA.

BACKGROUND: Neurotensin (NT), a neuroendocrine peptide, exerts trophic effects in
vivo and stimulates growth of some tumor cells in vitro. Androgen-sensitive
prostate cells derived from lymph node carcinoma of the prostate (LNCaP) secrete 
NT and exhibit growth responses to NT. This study examines NT secretion, NT
receptor and NT-growth responses in androgen-independent prostatic carcinoma
(PC3) cells derived from prostate adenocarcinoma metastatic to bone.
METHODS: Binding of 125I-NT to PC3 membranes was studied by filtration. NT was
measured by RIA. Reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was
used for NT and NT receptor mRNA. Growth was measured as 3H-thymidine
incorporation into DNA.
RESULTS: Scatchard analyses gave two binding components (Kd1 = 40 pM and Kd2 =
300 pM) in equal amounts (15-30 x 10(3) sites/cell). The bioactive region of NT
was essential and the specific, non-peptide NT antagonist, SR48692, inhibited
(IC50 = 3 nM). GTP analogs, sodium ion and SH-directed alkylating agents also
inhibited. Glutaraldehyde crosslinking labeled two substances (M(r) of 23 and 46 
kDa). RT-PCR indicated robust expression of authentic NT receptor but little for 
NT precursor. NT was stable in PC3 cultures but it was not found in cells or
conditioned media. Incubated with PC3 cells, NT exhibited a mitogenic effect with
bell-shaped dose-response and maximum at 100 pM NT.
CONCLUSIONS: PC3 cells expressed genuine NT receptors and generated growth
responses to physiologic levels of NT which were blocked by SR48692. If NT
contributes to the survival of prostate tumor cells upon androgen deprivation
therapy, NT antagonists might be useful agents in further treatment.

DOI: 10.1002/(sici)1097-0045(19970515)31:3<183::aid-pros7>3.0.co;2-m 
PMID: 9167771  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


354. RNA. 1997 Mar;3(3):291-302.

In vitro RNA binding of the hepatitis A virus proteinase 3C (HAV 3Cpro) to
secondary structure elements within the 5' terminus of the HAV genome.

Kusov YY(1), Gauss-Müller V.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Molecular Biology, Univerisity of Lübeck,
Germany.koussov@molbio.mu-luebeck.de

The secondary structure elements at the 5' nontranslated region (NTR) of the
picornaviral RNAs can be divided functionally into two domains, one of which
directs cap-independent translation, whereas the other is essential for viral RNA
replication. For the latter, the formation of an RNA replication complex that
involves particularly viral proteinase-containing polypeptides and cellular
proteins has been shown (Andino R, Rieckhof GE, Achacoso PL, Baltimore D, 1993,
EMBO J 12:3587-3598; Xiang W et al., 1995, RNA 1:892-904). To initiate studies on
the formation of the hepatitis A virus (HAV) RNA replication complex, binding of 
the HAV proteinase 3Cpro and 3CD to secondary structure elements at the 5' and 3'
NTR of the HAV RNA was investigated. Using mobility shift assay, UV crosslinking/
label transfer, and northwestern analysis, we show that both the HAV 3Cpro and
the proteolytically inactive mutant bind to in vitro synthesized transcripts,
suggesting that the RNA-binding site of the enzyme is separated spatially from
its catalytic center. Weak interactions with HAV 3Cpro were found for individual 
secondary structure elements comprising less than 100 nt. RNA-binding specificity
was unambiguous for transcripts comprising at least two stem-loops along with the
polypyrimidine tract. Furthermore, competition experiments suggest that the 5'
terminus of the HAV genome contains multiple binding sites for HAV 3Cpro. In
contrast to poliovirus, binding capacity of HAV 3CD to RNA of the 5' NTR was not 
improved as compared to 3C. The data imply that, during the viral life cycle, HAV
3Cpro might serve replicative function(s) in addition to proteolysis of the viral
polyprotein.


PMCID: PMC1369481
PMID: 9056766  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


355. EMBO J. 1997 Feb 3;16(3):599-610.

Viroid processing: switch from cleavage to ligation is driven by a change from a 
tetraloop to a loop E conformation.

Baumstark T(1), Schröder AR, Riesner D.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Physikalische Biologie, Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf,
Germany.

A longer-than-unit-length transcript of potato spindle tuber viroid is correctly 
processed in a potato nuclear extract only if the central conserved region is
folded into a multi-helix junction containing at least one GNRA
tetraloop-hairpin. The cleavage-ligation site between G95 and G96 was mapped with
S1 nuclease and primer extension. The structural motifs involved in the
processing mechanism were analysed by UV crosslinking, chemical mapping,
phylogenetic comparison and thermodynamic calculations. For processing, the first
cleavage occurs within the stem of the GNRA tetraloop; a local conformational
change switches the tetraloop motif into a loop E motif, stabilizing a
base-paired 5' end. The second cleavage yields unit-length linear intermediates, 
whose 3' end is also base-paired and most probably coaxially stacked in optimum
juxtaposition to the 5' end. They are ligated to mature circles
autocatalytically, with low efficiency, or enzymatically, with high efficiency.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/16.3.599 
PMCID: PMC1169663
PMID: 9034342  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


356. J Struct Biol. 1997 Feb;118(1):9-22.

Molecular and cellular characterization of CRP1, a Drosophila chromatin
decondensation protein.

Crevel G(1), Huikeshoven H, Cotterill S, Simon M, Wall J, Philpott A, Laskey RA, 
McConnell M, Fisher PA, Berrios M.

Author information: 
(1)Marie Curie Research Institute, Oxted, Surrey, England.

CRP1, a Drosophila nuclear protein that can catalyze decondensation of
demembranated Xenopus sperm chromatin was cloned and its primary structure was
deduced from cDNA sequence. Alignment of deduced amino acid sequence with
published sequences of other proteins revealed strong homologies to Xenopus
nucleoplasmin and NO38. CRP1 is encoded by one or several closely related genes
found at a single locus, position 99A on the right arm of chromosome 3. CRP1 mRNA
is expressed throughout Drosophila development; it is highest during oogenesis
and early embryogenesis. mRNA levels correlate closely with levels of protein
expression measured previously. Results of chemical crosslinking indicate that
CRP1 is either tetrameric or pentameric; similar ambiguity was revealed by direct
visualization using scanning transmission electron microscopy. Consistent with
previously published results, parallel crosslinking studies of Xenopus
nucleoplasmin suggested a pentameric structure. Scanning transmission electron
microscopic examination after negative staining revealed that CRP1 and Xenopus
nucleoplasmin are morphologically similar. CRP1 is able to substitute for
nucleoplasmin in Xenopus egg extract-mediated sperm chromatin decondensation. In 
vitro, CRP1-induced decondensation is accompanied by direct binding of CRP1 to
chromatin.

DOI: 10.1006/jsbi.1996.3836 
PMID: 9087911  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Methods Mol Biol. 1997;68:221-36.

Chemical crosslinking subtraction (CCLS).

Hampson IN(1), Hampson L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Haematology, Paterson Institute for Cancer
Research, Christie Hospital, Manchester, UK.

DOI: 10.1385/0-89603-482-8:221 
PMID: 9055261  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1996 Nov 12;228(2):347-51.

A cis-trans interaction at the 3'-untranslated region of ribonucleotide reductase
mRNA is regulated by TGF-beta 1, TGF-beta 2, and TGF-beta 3.

Amara FM(1), Smith GM, Kuschak TI, Takeuchi TL, Wright JA.

Author information: 
(1)Manitoba Institute of Cell Biology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada.

The R2 component of ribonucleotide reductase is rate-limiting for DNA synthesis
in proliferating cells, and recently, it has been shown that aberrant expression 
of R2 directly alters the malignant potential of tumor cells. We show that R2
gene expression is elevated in BALB/c 3T3 cells treated with transforming growth 
factor (TGF)-beta 1, TGF-beta 2, or TGF-beta 3, as determined by Northern blot
analysis. Gel shift assays and UV crosslinking studies demonstrated similar
post-transcriptional regulation at the 3'-untranslated region (3'-UTR) of the R2 
mRNA, by TGF-beta 1, TGF-beta 2, and TGF-beta 3. The three growth factors induced
a common 75 kDa RNA-protein complex. A 9 nucleotide sequence, GAGUUUGAG,
previously shown to be responsive to TGF-beta 1-mediated R2 message stability
changes, effectively competed out the formation of the R2 3'-UTR complex. We
propose that these three different members of the TGF-beta family work through a 
common mechanism to control an important component of cell proliferation and a
potential determinant of malignant progression.

DOI: 10.1006/bbrc.1996.1664 
PMID: 8920917  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


359. EMBO J. 1996 Nov 1;15(21):5760-71.

Impaired platelet aggregation and sustained bleeding in mice lacking the
fibrinogen motif bound by integrin alpha IIb beta 3.

Holmbäck K(1), Danton MJ, Suh TT, Daugherty CC, Degen JL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Children's Hospital Research Foundation,
Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

Blood loss at sites of vascular rupture is controlled by the adhesion and
aggregation of platelets and the formation of an insoluble fibrin matrix.
Fibrinogen is considered to be critical in these processes by both providing an
abundant dimeric ligand for alpha IIb beta 3-mediated platelet aggregation, and
serving as the fundamental building block of the fibrin polymer. To establish an 
in vivo model system to examine in detail the importance of alpha IIb beta
3-fibrinogen interactions in platelet function, hemostasis, response to injury
and vasoocclusive disease, and to test the prevailing hypothesis that the
C-terminal segment of the fibrinogen gamma chain is essential for alpha IIb beta 
3 binding, we have used gene-targeting technology in mice to eliminate the last
five residues (QAGDV) from the gamma chain. Mice homozygous for the modified
gamma chain gene (gamma delta 5/gamma delta 5) displayed a generally normal
hematological profile, including normal platelet count, plasma fibrinogen level, 
clotting time and fibrin crosslinking. However, both gamma delta 5-fibrinogen
binding to alpha IIb beta 3 and platelet aggregation were highly defective.
Remarkably, another alpha IIb beta 3-dependent process, clot retraction, was
unaffected by the gamma delta 5 mutation. Despite the preservation of clotting
function, gamma delta 5/gamma delta 5 mice were unable to control blood loss
following a surgical challenge and occasionally developed fatal neonatal bleeding
events.


PMCID: PMC452323
PMID: 8918453  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Thromb Res. 1996 Oct 15;84(2):129-36.

Migration of cultured vascular smooth muscle cells into non-crosslinked fibrin
gels.

Naito M(1), Nomura H, Iguchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatrics, Nagoya University School of Medicine, Japan.

We evaluated the migration of vascular smooth muscle cells into fibrin gels,
using an in vitro assay system. Vascular smooth muscle cells from bovine fetal
aorta migrated into fibrin gels and showed a characteristic elongated
spindle-shaped appearance with long cytoplasmic processes. Varying the
concentration of thrombin (0.05-1 NIHU/ml) used to form the fibrin gel had little
effect on cell migration although higher concentrations of thrombin inhibited the
migration. Migration of the cells into fibrin gels was dependent on RNA and
protein synthesis but not on DNA synthesis. The addition of antithrombin III,
hirudin, and D-phenylalanyl-L-prolyl-L-arginine chloromethyl ketone after gel
formation had no effect, suggesting that residual thrombin in fibrin gels had no 
influence on subsequent cell migration. Neither the factor XIII-induced
crosslinking of fibrin nor the fibrinopeptides released during gel formation were
involved in the present migration assay system. Tranexamic acid, an inhibitor of 
plasminogen activator, or aprotinin, a plasmin inhibitor, also had no significant
effect, suggesting that fibrinolysis induced by plasmin was not involved in this 
system. These findings showed that fibrin gels themselves induce the migration of
vascular smooth muscle cells (haptotaxis) without other chemotactic or
chemokinetic substances, suggesting an important role for fibrin in the
development and progression of such vascular diseases as atherosclerosis,
thrombosis and the development of restenosis following balloon angioplasty.

DOI: 10.1016/0049-3848(96)00168-5 
PMID: 8897702  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Oct 15;93(21):11558-62.

RNA replication by Q beta replicase: a working model.

Brown D(1), Gold L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, University of
Colorado, Boulder 80309, USA.

Two classes of RNA ligands that bound to separate, high affinity nucleic acid
binding sites on Q beta replicase were previously identified. RNA ligands to the 
two sites, referred to as site I and site II, were used to investigate the
molecular mechanism of RNA replication employed by the four-subunit replicase.
Replication inhibition by site I- and site II-specific ligands defined two
subsets of replicatable RNAs. When provided with appropriate 3' ends, ligands to 
either site served as replication templates. UV crosslinking experiments revealed
that site I is associated with the S1 subunit, site II with elongation factor Tu,
and polymerization with the viral subunit of the holoenzyme. These results
provide the framework for a three site model describing template recognition and 
product strand initiation by Q beta replicase.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.93.21.11558 
PMCID: PMC38096
PMID: 8876174  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Leuk Lymphoma. 1996 Oct;23(3-4):187-201.

Chlorambucil in chronic lymphocytic leukemia: mechanism of action.

Begleiter A(1), Mowat M, Israels LG, Johnston JB.

Author information: 
(1)Manitoba Institute of Cell Biology, Manitoba Cancer Treatment and Research
Foundation, Winnipeg, Canada.

Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is the most common leukemia in Western
countries but the clinical presentation and rate of disease progression are
highly variable. When treatment is required the most commonly used therapy is the
nitrogen mustard alkylating agent, chlorambucil (CLB), with or without
prednisone. Although CLB has been used in the treatment of CLL for forty years
the exact mechanism of action of this agent in CLL is still unclear. Studies in
proliferating model tumor systems have demonstrated that CLB can bind to a
variety of cellular structures such as membranes, RNA, proteins and DNA; however,
DNA crosslinking appears to be most important for antitumor activity in these
systems. In addition, a number of different mechanisms can contribute to CLB
resistance in these tumor models including increased drug metabolism, DNA repair 
and CLB detoxification resulting from elevated levels of glutathione (GSH) and
glutathione S-transferase (GST) activity. However, unlike tumor models in vitro, 
CLL cells are generally not proliferating and studies in CLL cells have raised
questions about the hypothesis that DNA crosslinking is the major mechanism of
antitumor action for CLB in this disease. CLB induces apoptosis in CLL cells and 
this appears to correlate with the clinical effects of this agent. Thus,
alkylation of cellular targets other than DNA, which can also induce apoptosis,
may contribute to the activity of CLB. Alterations in genes such as p53, mdm-2,
bcl-2 and bax which control entry into apoptosis may cause drug resistance. Loss 
of wild-type p53 by mutation or deletion occurs in 10 to 15% of CLL patients and 
appears to correlate strongly with poor clinical response to CLB. The induction
of apoptosis by CLB is paralleled by an increase in P53 and Mdm-2 but this
increase in not observed in patients with p53 mutations indicating that with high
drug concentrations CLB can produce cell death through P53 independent pathways. 
The level of Mdm-2 mRNA in the CLL cells is not a useful predictor of drug
sensitivity. In addition, although Bax and Bcl-2 are important regulators of
apoptosis and the levels of these proteins are elevated in CLL cells compared
with normal B cells, the levels of Bax and Bcl-2, or the Bax:Bcl-2 ratio, are not
important determinants of drug sensitivity in this leukemia. Finally, whereas CLB
and nucleoside analogs may produce cell death in CLL by a P53 dependent pathway
other agents, such as dexamethasone or vincristine, may act through
P53-independent pathways.

DOI: 10.3109/10428199609054821 
PMID: 9031099  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Biokhimiia. 1996 Oct;61(10):1825-36.

[Metabolic and structural properties of extrachromosomal DNA in mammalian cells].

[Article in Russian]

Serdiuk OI, Sukhova TI, Alekhina RP, Shelepov VP, Arsenin SL, Moiseev VL,
Likhtenshteĭn AV.

Discrete bands of free DNAs of approximately 25 kbp were detected in human cell
cultures. According to electrophoretic shifts induced by single and double strand
breaks, they from topological isoforms (supercoiled, open, and linear). Long-term
labeling (24 h) of growing and quiescent cultured cells by [3H]thymidine
indicates differences of free versus chromosomal DNAs including (i) significantly
lower specific radioactivity in growing cells, (ii) higher specific radioactivity
in quiescent cells, and (iii) resistance to fluorodeoxyuridine labeling. During
apoptosis of cultured Namalwa cells, heterogeneous fragments are formed which
differ from free DNAs. Crosslinking of nascent RNA with DNA template by
8-methoxypsoralen indicated slight transcriptional activity of free DNAs.


PMID: 9011231  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


364. EMBO J. 1996 Sep 16;15(18):5032-9.

A direct interaction between a DNA-tracking protein and a promoter recognition
protein: implications for searching DNA sequence.

Tinker-Kulberg RL(1), Fu TJ, Geiduschek EP, Kassavetis GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Center for Molecular Genetics, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla 92093-0634, USA.

Bacteriophage T4 gene 45 protein, gp45, serves as the sliding clamp of viral DNA 
replication and as the activator of T4 late gene transcription. In the latter
context, DNA tracking is an essential feature of the unique mechanism of action. 
T4 late promoters, which consist of a simple TATA box, TATAAATA, are recognized
by the small sigma-family gene 55 protein, gp55, which binds to Escherichia coli 
RNA polymerase core. A direct and RNA polymerase-independent interaction of gp45 
with gp55 has been demonstrated in two ways. (i) gp45 tracks along DNA;
co-tracking of gp55 requires the previously documented DNA-loading process of
gp45, and can be detected by photochemical crosslinking. (ii) The dynamics of DNA
tracking by gp45 can be followed by footprinting; the catenated DNA-tracking
state of gp45 is short-lived, but is stabilized by gp55. The ability of this
topologically linked DNA-tracking transcriptional activator to interact directly 
with a promoter recognition protein suggests the existence of multiple pathways
of promoter location, which are discussed.


PMCID: PMC452242
PMID: 8890176  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


365. J Clin Invest. 1996 Sep 15;98(6):1389-99.

Constitutive and inducible expression of SKALP/elafin provides anti-elastase
defense in human epithelia.

Pfundt R(1), van Ruissen F, van Vlijmen-Willems IM, Alkemade HA, Zeeuwen PL, Jap 
PH, Dijkman H, Fransen J, Croes H, van Erp PE, Schalkwijk J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Skin-derived antileukoproteinase (SKALP), also known as elafin, is a serine
proteinase inhibitor first discovered in keratinocytes from hyperproliferative
human epidermis. In addition to the proteinase inhibiting domain which is
directed against polymorphonuclear leukocyte (PMN) derived enzymes such as
elastase and proteinase 3, SKALP contains multiple transglutaminase (TGase)
substrate domains which enable crosslinking to extracellular and cell envelope
proteins. Here we show that SKALP is constitutively expressed in several
epithelia that are continuously subjected to inflammatory stimuli, such as the
oral cavity and the vagina where it co-localizes with type 1 TGase. All epithelia
from sterile body cavities are negative for SKALP. In general, stratified
squamous epithelia are positive, whereas pseudostratified epithelia,
simple/glandular epithelia and normal epidermis are negative. SKALP was found in 
fetal tissues of the oral cavity from 17 wk gestation onwards where it continued 
to be expressed up to adult life. Remarkably, in fetal epidermis SKALP was found 
from week 28 onwards, but was downregulated to undetectable levels in neonatal
skin within three months, suggesting a role during pregnancy in feto-maternal
interactions or in the early maturation phase of the epidermis. Immunoelectron
microscopy revealed the presence of SKALP in secretory vesicles including the
lamellar granules. In culture models for epidermal keratinocytes we found that
expression of the endogenous SKALP gene provided protection against cell
detachment caused by purified elastase or activated PMNs. Addition of exogenous
recombinant SKALP fully protected the keratinocytes against PMN-dependent
detachment whereas superoxide dismutase and catalase were only marginally
effective. These findings strongly suggest that the constitutive expression of
SKALP in squamous epithelia, and the inducible expression in epidermis
participate in the control of epithelial integrity, by inhibiting PMN derived
proteinases.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI118926 
PMCID: PMC507565
PMID: 8823304  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Science. 1996 Jul 12;273(5272):211-7.

Transcription processivity: protein-DNA interactions holding together the
elongation complex.

Nudler E(1), Avetissova E, Markovtsov V, Goldfarb A.

Author information: 
(1)Public Health Research Institute, New York, NY 10016, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 1996 Jul 12;273(5272):202-3.

The elongation of RNA chains during transcription occurs in a ternary complex
containing RNA polymerase (RNAP), DNA template, and nascent RNA. It is shown here
that elongating RNAP from Escherichia coli can switch DNA templates by means of
end-to-end transposition without loss of the transcript. After the switch,
transcription continues on the new template. With the use of defined short DNA
fragments as switching templates, RNAP-DNA interactions were dissected into two
spatially distinct components, each contributing to the stability of the
elongating complex. The front (F) interaction occurs ahead of the growing end of 
RNA. This interaction is non-ionic and requires 7 to 9 base pairs of intact DNA
duplex. The rear (R) interaction is ionic and requires approximately six
nucleotides of the template DNA strand behind the active site and one nucleotide 
ahead of it. The nontemplate strand is not involved. With the use of protein-DNA 
crosslinking, the F interaction was mapped to the conserved zinc finger motif in 
the NH2-terminus of the beta' subunit and the R interaction, to the COOH-terminal
catalytic domain of the beta subunit. Mutational disruption of the zinc finger
selectively destroyed the F interaction and produced a salt-sensitive ternary
complex with diminished processivity. A model of the ternary complex is proposed 
here that suggests that trilateral contacts in the active center maintain the
nonprocessive complex, whereas a front-end domain including the zinc finger
ensures processivity.

DOI: 10.1126/science.273.5272.211 
PMID: 8662499  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


367. J Biochem. 1996 Jul;120(1):98-103.

Purification and characterization of the Proteus vulgaris BlaA protein, the
activator of the beta-lactamase gene.

Ishiguro K(1), Sugimoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Hokkaido University,
Sapporo.

Induction of the expression of the beta-lactamase gene, blaB, is regulated by the
blaA gene located just upstream of blaB in the opposite direction in Proteus
vulgaris. The expression of the blaA gene is negatively autoregulated by its own 
product BlaA, the activator of the blaB gene. The P. vulgaris BlaA protein shares
high amino acid homology with the LysR family members, which are prokaryotic
transcriptional activators that possess a putative helix-turn-helix DNA binding
motif. To characterize its function, we purified the BlaA protein to homogeneity 
from Escherichia coli carrying the expression plasmid of the blaA gene driven by 
the tac promoter. The gel shift assay and DNaseI footprinting showed that
purified BlaA specifically bound to the blaA promoter region, which resides
immediately upstream of that of blaB. The binding region contained an inverted
repeat, including a T-N11-T sequence which is similar to the LysR motif (T-N11-A)
that is conserved in some LysR family members [Goethals et al. (1992) Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 89, 1646-1650]. We also showed that the BlaA protein forms a dimer
in solution, using glycerol gradient centrifugation and glutaraldehyde
crosslinking.

DOI: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.jbchem.a021399 
PMID: 8864850  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Blood. 1996 Jun 1;87(11):4629-35.

Characterization of vasoactive intestinal peptide receptors on human
megakaryocytes and platelets.

Park SK(1), Olson TA, Ercal N, Summers M, O'Dorisio MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, USA.

Vasoactive intestinal peptide receptor I (VIPRI) expression was examined in
megakaryocytes using reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
VIPRI protein was characterized in platelet membranes using covalent crosslinking
techniques. Human megakaryocytes were isolated from suspension cultures of cord
blood and adult bone marrow mononuclear cells using a murine monoclonal antibody 
to human platelet glycoprotein IIB/IIIA (CD41) and immunomagnetic beads. RT-PCR
primers were constructed for the VIP, VIPRI, and VIPRII genes as well as for
megakaryocyte specific genes, c-mpl and platelet factor 4 (PF-4). VIP, VIPRI,
c-mpl, and PF-4 were coexpressed in megakaryocyte mRNA. Southern blot analysis
confirmed the expression of VIPRI. 125I-VIP was covalently cross-linked to human 
platelet membranes using the homobifunctional reagent disuccinimidyl suberate,
followed by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and autoradiography. A
125I-VIP-protein complex of Mr = 50,000 was identified. Labeling of the Mr =
50,000 component was completely abolished by unlabeled VIP, but not by peptide
histidine methionine or growth hormone releasing factor, indicating specific
binding of VIP to the platelet membranes. Taken together, these results suggest
that VIP may have direct effects on megakaryocytopoiesis and support our earlier 
observations of VIP modulation of platelet aggregation.


PMID: 8639831  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Nucleic Acids Res. 1996 May 1;24(9):1608-15.

The polypyrimidine tract binding (PTB) protein interacts with single-stranded DNA
in a sequence-specific manner.

Brunel F(1), Zakin MM, Buc H, Buckle M.

Author information: 
(1)Unité d'Expression des Gènes Eucaryotes, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

Polypyrimidine tract binding (PTB) protein is a cellular factor whose function is
unknown. Various RNA or single-stranded DNA sequences have been shown to interact
with PTB. In this paper, using laser UV crosslinking and electrophoretic mobility
shift assays to probe DNA-protein interactions, we demonstrate that PTB binding
at a single-stranded DNA target is highly sequence-specific. We provide data
showing that PTB interacts with the top strand of the adenovirus major late
promoter transcriptional initiator, a sequence rich in pyrimidine residues. We
also demonstrate that PTB is organised into at least two different binding
domains.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/24.9.1608 
PMCID: PMC145841
PMID: 8649976  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Apr 2;93(7):3094-8.

RecA protein stimulates homologous recombination in plants.

Reiss B(1), Klemm M, Kosak H, Schell J.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Züchtungsforschung, Cologne, Germany.

A number of RecA-like proteins have been found in eukaryotic organisms. We
demonstrate that the prokaryotic recombination protein RecA itself is capable of 
interacting with genomic homologous DNA in somatic plant cells. Resistance to the
DNA crosslinking agent mitomycin C requires homologous recombination as well as
excision repair activity. Tobacco protoplasts expressing a nucleus-targeted RecA 
protein were at least three times as efficient as wild-type cells in repairing
mitomycin C-induced damage. Moreover, homologous recombination at a defined locus
carrying an endogenous nuclear marker gene was stimulated at least 10-fold in
transgenic plant cells expressing nucleus-targeted RecA. The increase in
resistance to mitomycin C and the stimulation of intrachromosomal recombination
demonstrate that Escherichia coli RecA protein is functional in genomic
homologous recombination in plants, especially when targeted to the plant
nucleus.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.93.7.3094 
PMCID: PMC39767
PMID: 8610174  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1996 Apr 1;328(1):101-6.

Expression of mRNAs for lysyl oxidase and type III procollagen in cultured
fibroblasts from patients with the Menkes and occipital horn syndromes as
determined by quantitative polymerase chain reaction.

Kemppainen R(1), Hämäläinen ER, Kuivaniemi H, Tromp G, Pihlajaniemi T, Kivirikko 
KI.

Author information: 
(1)Collagen Research Unit, Department of Medical Biochemistry, University of
Oulu, Finland.

The Menkes syndrome and the occipital horn syndrome are two X-linked recessively 
inherited disorders characterized by abnormalities in copper metabolism. These
abnormalities are associated with a reduction in the activity of lysyl oxidase
(EC 1.4.3.13), an extracellular copper enzyme that initiates the crosslinking of 
collagens and elastin. We report here that the amount of lysyl oxidase mRNA, as
studied by Northern blotting, and the number of lysyl oxidase mRNA molecules per 
picogram of RNA, as determined by a quantitative PCR method, were decreased in
three cultured skin fibroblast lines from patients with the Menkes syndrome and
two from patients with the occipital horn syndrome compared with four control
cell lines. The decreased lysyl oxidase activity found in these disorders thus
appears to be a least in part due to a pretranslational mechanism. No decrease
was found in the number of the beta-actin mRNA molecules in the Menkes cell
lines, but rather a slight increase, whereas a decrease was found in these
molecules in the occipital horn cell lines. An additional abnormality found in
the Menkes cell lines was a significant increase in the number of mRNA molecules 
for type III procollagen in two of the three cell lines investigated. The present
and previous data indicate that the Menkes syndrome may involve several
abnormalities in the expression of genes for connective tissue proteins.

DOI: 10.1006/abbi.1996.0148 
PMID: 8638917  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Eur J Biochem. 1996 Mar 1;236(2):365-72.

Analyses of cis-acting and trans-acting elements that are crucial to sustain
pregnancy-specific glycoprotein gene expression in different cell types.

Koritschoner NP(1), Panzetta-Dutari GM, Bocco JL, Dumur CI, Flury A, Patrito LC.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica Clínica, Facultad de Ciencias Quimicas, Universidad
Nacional de Córdoba, Argentina.

Pregnancy-specific beta 1 glycoprotein genes (PSG) are mainly expressed during
human placental development, though their expression has been reported in other
normal and pathological tissues, e.g. hydatidiform mole (HM), of distinct
origins. However, the molecular components implicated in the regulation of PSG
are not well understood. To identify some of the regulatory elements involved in 
the transcriptional control of PSG expression, the DNA-protein interactions and
the basal activities of the TATA-box-less PSG5 promoter were determined in
different tissues and cell types. In DNAse-I protection assays, DNA-binding
proteins from human term placenta (HTP) protected a region of 27 bp located from 
nucleotides --150 to --124, overlapping the farthest 5' upstream cap site and
resembling an initiator-like element. In electrophoretic mobility shift assays
(EMSA), three complexes were detected using nuclear extracts from HTP and an
oligonucleotide containing the 27-bp motif. In situ ultraviolet crosslinking
analysis of the specific complexes revealed that two proteins of 78.0 kDa and
53.0 kDa are involved in such interactions, in accordance with the bands of 80.0 
kDa and 57.5 kDa observed by Southwestern blotting. Competitive EMSA using mutant
oligonucleotides with the substitution of 5'ACCCAT3' by 5'GATATC3' within the
27-bp motif revealed that this sequence is fundamental for the formation of the
specific DNA-protein complexes. We show in transient transfection experiments
performed in HeLa, COS-7 and JEG-3 cells, that such mutation completely abolished
the transcriptional activity of the PSG5 promoter, independently of the cell
type. Moreover, this mutation disrupted the formation of the specific DNA-protein
complexes which were essentially the same as those displayed by HTP. We also
determined the binding activities of nucleoproteins derived from placental
tissues in earlier developmental and pathological stages, i.e. first trimester
placenta (1-TRIM) and HM, respectively, showing that the DNA-binding patterns
were different from each other and distinct from those elicited by HTP. Our
results indicate that the cis-acting and trans-acting elements analyzed are
indispensable to support PSG5 promoter activity in cell lines which do or do not 
produce PSG. In addition, these elements appear to play a role in the mechanisms 
involved in PSG basal expression during placental development and
differentiation.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1996.00365.x 
PMID: 8612604  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Virology. 1996 Mar 1;217(1):272-84.

Physical and functional characterization of the double-stranded RNA binding
protein encoded by the vaccinia virus E3 gene.

Ho CK(1), Shuman S.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, 10021, USA.

The vaccinia virus E3 gene encodes a 190-amino acid double-stranded (ds)
RNA-binding protein that antagonizes cellular antiviral response pathways
triggered by dsRNA and interferon. The physical and functional properties of the 
E3 protein were determined using recombinant E3 produced in bacteria and purified
to homogeneity. We show by sedimentation and chemical crosslinking that E3 is a
dimer in solution at high ionic strength. E3 self-associates to form higher order
oligomers as ionic strength is reduced from 1 to 0.1 M NaCl. Structure probing by
limited proteolysis suggests that E3 consists of amino- and carboxyl-terminal
domains separated by a trypsin-sensitive bridge at residues Lys-92 and Arg-95.
The carboxyl-domain of E3 contains a conserved dsRNA binding motif (dsRBM) found 
in many other proteins that interact with dsRNA. That the C-terminal domain per
se binds to dsRNA was verified by studies of recombinant E3(100-190) purified
from bacteria. The affinity of the C-terminal domain for dsRNA was comparable to 
that of the full-length E3 protein (KD approximately 7 to 9 nM). E3(100-190) did 
not bind to DNA-DNA duplexes or to DNA-RNA hybrids, suggesting that the dsRBM
specifically recognizes an A-form helix. E3(100-190) is a dimer in solution;
however, unlike the full-sized E3 protein, E3(100-190) does not form higher order
multimers at low ionic strength.

DOI: 10.1006/viro.1996.0114 
PMID: 8599212  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


374. FEBS Lett. 1996 Feb 26;381(1-2):103-5.

Mapping of DNA-binding proteins along the yeast genome by UV-induced DNA-protein 
crosslinking.

Papatsenko DA(1), Priporova IV, Belikov SV, Karpov VL.

Author information: 
(1)W.A. Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences,
Moscow, Russia.

UV-induced crosslinking of DNA-binding proteins to DNA in intact nuclei of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae and subsequent 'protein image' hybridization were
applied to map non-histone proteins along single-copy genes of yeast. We detected
two polypeptides that most probably correspond to core subunits of yeast
RNA-polymerase II in the coding region of transketolase gene (TKL2). Several
non-histone proteins were also detected which bind to the upstream region of TKL2
gene, and to the intergenic spacer between calmodulin (CMD1) and beta-mannosyl
transferase (ALG1) genes.

DOI: 10.1016/0014-5793(96)00091-9 
PMID: 8641413  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


375. J Mol Biol. 1996 Feb 16;256(1):20-30.

Xenopus poly(A) binding protein: functional domains in RNA binding and
protein-protein interaction.

Kühn U(1), Pieler T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie und Molekulare Zellbiologie, Gottingen, Germany.

Subsets of the four RNA binding domains (RBD 1 to 4) in the Xenopus
poly-adenylate binding protein (PABP) have distinct affinities and specificities 
for RNA. RBDs 1 plus 2 exhibit RNA affinity and selectivity equal to the
wild-type (WT) protein. RBDs 3 plus 4 have distinct selectivity and about
ten-fold reduced affinity for A23, and the isolated RBDs 2 or 3 or 4 exhibit
about 100-fold reduced affinity for A23 in comparison to WT. For the full-length 
protein, independent RNA contacts have been mapped by UV crosslinking with RBDs
1/2 and RBDs 3/4. The carboxy-terminal, non-RBD portion of the protein does not
contribute to RNA affinity or selectivity, but confers homodimerization activity 
on PABP. RBDs 3 and 4 cooperate with the C terminus to gain poly(A) organizing
activity, i.e. the ability to form an RNP with multiple, regularly spaced copies 
of PABP on a poly(A) substrate.

DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.1996.0065 
PMID: 8609610  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Protein Sci. 1996 Feb;5(2):278-86.

Chemical crosslinking of the subunits of HIV-1 reverse transcriptase.

Debyser Z(1), De Clercq E.

Author information: 
(1)Rega Institute for Medical Research, Leuven, Belgium.
zegerdebyser@uz.kuleuven.ac.be

The reverse transcriptase (RT) of the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1)
is composed of two subunits of 66 and 51 kDa in a 1 to 1 ratio. Because
dimerization is a prerequisite for enzymatic activity, interference with the
dimerization process could constitute an alternative antiviral strategy for RT
inhibition. Here we describe an in vitro assay for the study of the dimerization 
state of HIV-1 reverse transcriptase based on chemical crosslinking of the
subunits with dimethylsuberimidate. Crosslinking results in the formation of
covalent bonds between the subunits, so that the crosslinked species can be
resolved by denaturing gel electrophoresis. Crosslinked RT species with molecular
weight greater than that of the dimeric form accumulate during a 1-15-min time
course. Initial evidence suggests that those high molecular weight species
represent trimers and tetramers and may be the result of intramolecular
crosslinking of the subunits of a higher-order RT oligomer. A peptide that
corresponds to part of the tryptophan repeat motif in the connection domain of
HIV-1 RT inhibits crosslink formation as well as enzymatic activity. The
crosslinking assay thus allows the investigation of the effect of inhibitors on
the dimerization of HIV-1 RT.

DOI: 10.1002/pro.5560050212 
PMCID: PMC2143333
PMID: 8745406  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Lung Cancer. 1996 Feb;14(1):63-73.

Acquired TGF beta 1 sensitivity and TGF beta 1 expression in cell lines
established from a single small cell lung cancer patient during clinical
progression.

Nørgaard P(1), Damstrup L, Rygaard K, Spang-Thomsen M, Poulsen HS.

Author information: 
(1)Section for Radiation Biology, Finsen Center, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen,
Denmark.

Three small cell lung cancer cell lines established from a single patient during 
longitudinal follow-up were examined for in vitro expression of TGF beta and TGF 
beta receptors, i.e. the components of an autocrine loop. GLC 14 was established 
prior to treatment, GLC 16 on relapse after chemotherapy and GLC 19 on recurrence
after radiotherapy. TGF beta was detected by ELISA and TGF beta receptors by
chemical crosslinking to radiolabelled TGF beta 1. Furthermore, TGF beta and TGF 
beta receptor mRNAs were detected by northern blot analysis. Expression of type
II TGF beta receptor mRNA and protein was found in GLC 16 and GLC 19. These cell 
lines were also growth inhibited by exogenously administrated TGF beta 1. TGF
beta 1 mRNA and protein in its latent form was only expressed in the
radiotherapy-resistant cell line, GLC 19. The results indicate that disease
progression in this patient was paralleled by a gain in sensitivity to the growth
inhibition by TGF beta 1 due to type II TGF beta receptor, and a gain of latent
TGF beta 1 protein. Lack of type II receptor expression in GLC 14, which was also
resistant to growth inhibition by exogenous TGF beta 1, was not due to gross
structural changes in the type II receptor gene, as examined by Southern
blotting. Also, the type I receptor could not be detected by ligand binding assay
in this cell line, despite expression of mRNA for this receptor. This agrees with
previous findings that type I receptor cannot bind TGF beta 1 without
co-expression of the type II receptor.


PMID: 8696721  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Cell Immunol. 1996 Feb 1;167(2):302-12.

Characterization of lpr-derived T cell hybridomas: Fas-deficient hybridomas are
deathless, growth-arrested, and cytotoxic upon activation.

Cui H(1), el-Khatib M, Sherr DH, Ettinger R, Sy MS, Marshak-Rothstein A, Ju ST.

Author information: 
(1)Arthritis Center, Boston University School of Medicine, Massachusetts, USA.

T cell hybridomas that are deathless upon TCR crosslinking were generated from
lpr mice. The deathless hybridomas (1.4 and 5D5) expressed extremely low Fas even
after anti-CD3 activation, whereas activation-induced cell death (AICD) was
observed for Fas-expressing hybridomas. The deathless hybridomas were activated
to produce FasL and IL-2, indicating that the intrinsic defect in Fas expression 
or up-regulation resulted in AICD blockade. The deathless hybridoma cells
expressed longer and stronger FasL cytotoxicity than AICD-sensitive hybridomas.
Although deathless, activated 5D5 cells were arrested at the G1/S border. Growth 
arrest lasted for at least 5 days, but some cells eventually recovered and
proliferated. The deathless 5D5 cells were used to demonstrate that AICD includes
a fratricidal mechanism that kills AICD-sensitive bystanders. The deathless T
cell hybridomas are useful tools for studying T cell activation-dependent
functions sensitive to AICD.

DOI: 10.1006/cimm.1996.0039 
PMID: 8603440  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


379. EMBO J. 1996 Feb 1;15(3):590-7.

Inactivation of topoisomerases affects transcription-dependent chromatin
transitions in rDNA but not in a gene transcribed by RNA polymerase II.

Cavalli G(1), Bachmann D, Thoma F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie, Zurich, Switzerland.

Previous studies on a chromatin reporter gene (GAL-URARIB) in yeast showed that
nucleosomes were maintained but rearranged during transcription in galactose,
which was consistent with local dissociation of histones at the site of the RNA
polymerase. Furthermore, repositioning of nucleosomes occurred rapidly after
glucose repression. Because nucleosomal disruption and transcription produce
topological changes in the chromatin substrate, the effect of topoisomerase
activity was tested by the insertion of GAL-URABIB in topoisomerase mutant
strains. The chromatin structure was analysed by nuclease digestion and psoralen 
crosslinking, and compared with that of the rDNA locus. In GAL-URARIB, neither
the inactivation of topoisomerases I, II or I and II generated nucleosomal loss
during transcription, nor was topoisomerase activity required for repositioning
of the nucleosomes after repression. In contrast, the inactivation of
topoisomerase I promoted an enhanced psoralen accessibility of the transcribed
rDNA, possibly because of altered supercoiling, and the inactivation of
topoisomerases I and II disrupted the chromatin structure of the whole rDNA locus
by redistribution of the nucleosomes. The inactivation of topoisomerase II alone 
had no effect. These observations substantiate a differential participation of
topoisomerases in the modulation of the chromatin structures of rDNA genes and of
a single copy polymerase II gene. It is suggested that topological stress in
genes transcribed by RNA polymerase II might diffuse away into flanking regions.


PMCID: PMC449977
PMID: 8599942  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


380. EMBO J. 1996 Jan 2;15(1):150-61.

Role of Escherichia coli RNA polymerase alpha subunit in modulation of pausing,
termination and anti-termination by the transcription elongation factor NusA.

Liu K(1), Zhang Y, Severinov K, Das A, Hanna MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Botany and Microbiology, University of Oklahoma, Norman, 73019, 
USA.

The alpha subunit (alpha) of RNA polymerase (RNAP) is critical for assembly of
polymerase and positive control of transcription initiation in Escherichia coli. 
Here, we report that alpha also plays a role in transcription elongation, and
this involves a direct interaction between alpha and NusA factor. During in vitro
transcription without NusA, alpha interacts with the nascent RNA, as revealed by 
photocrosslinking. When NusA is present, RNA crosslinks to NusA rather than to
alpha. We show that this NusA-RNA interaction is diminished during transcription 
with an RNAP mutant that lacks the C-terminus of alpha beyond amino acid 235,
including the so-called alpha CTD. The absence of alpha CTD also affects NusA's
ability to enhance transcription pausing, termination at intrinsic terminators
and anti-termination by the phage lambda Q anti-terminator, but not
anti-termination by the lambda N anti-terminator. NusA functions are not
recovered even when transcription with mutant RNAP is done with excess NusA, a
condition which does restore NusA-RNA crosslinking. By affinity chromatography,
we show that NusA interacts directly with alpha, and also with beta and beta',
but not with mutant alpha. Hence, alpha-NusA interaction is vital for the control
of transcript elongation and termination.


PMCID: PMC449927
PMID: 8598198  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Dec 19;92(26):12220-4.

Using in vitro selection to direct the covalent attachment of human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 Rev protein to high-affinity RNA ligands.

Jensen KB(1), Atkinson BL, Willis MC, Koch TH, Gold L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, University of
Colorado, Boulder 80309, USA.

We have used an in vitro selection procedure called crosslinking SELEX (SELEX =
systematic evolution of ligands by exponential enrichment) to identify RNA
sequences that bind with high affinity and crosslink to the Rev protein from
human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1). A randomized RNA library substituted
with the photoreactive chromophore 5-iodouracil was irradiated with monochromatic
UV light in the presence of Rev. Those sequences with the ability to
photocrosslink to Rev were partitioned from the rest of the RNA pool, amplified, 
and used for the next round of selection. Rounds of photocrosslinking selection
were alternated with rounds of selection for RNA sequences with high affinity to 
Rev. This iterative, dual-selection method yielded RNA molecules with
subnanomolar dissociation constants and high efficiency photocrosslinking to Rev.
Some of the RNA molecules isolated by this procedure form a stable complex with
Rev that is resistant to denaturing gel electrophoresis in the absence of UV
irradiation. In vitro selection of nucleic acids by using modified nucleotides
allows the isolation of nucleic acid molecules with potentially limitless
chemical capacities to covalently attack a target molecule.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.92.26.12220 
PMCID: PMC40328
PMID: 8618873  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


382. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1995 Dec;80(12):3447-57.

Insulin-like growth factor I receptor expression and function in fibroblasts from
two patients with deletion of the distal long arm of chromosome 15.

Siebler T(1), Lopaczynski W, Terry CL, Casella SJ, Munson P, De Leon DD, Phang L,
Blakemore KJ, McEvoy RC, Kelley RI, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Metabolism Branch, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Most patients with deletion of the distal long arm of chromosome 15 have
intrauterine growth retardation and postnatal growth deficiency in addition to
developmental abnormalities. It has been proposed that the absence of one copy of
the insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) receptor gene may play a role in the
growth deficiency seen in this syndrome. To address this question we examined
IGF-I receptor expression and function in fibroblasts from two patients with
deletion of the distal long arm of chromosome 15 (15q26.1-->qter). Quantitative
Southern blot analysis of the IGF-I receptor gene was performed on HindIII
digests of fibroblast DNA. Radioactivity in the 1.7-kilobase receptor fragment in
the two patients was 55% and 51% of the values in controls, consistent with the
absence of one copy of the IGF-I receptor gene. IGF-I receptor messenger
ribonucleic acid levels were quantitated by a solution hybridization/nuclease
protection assay. Receptor messenger ribonucleic acid levels in the two patients 
were 45% and 52% of the values in controls. Northern blotting demonstrated normal
size IGF-I receptor transcripts and affinity crosslinking of [125I]IGF-I to
Triton X-100-solubilized fibroblasts demonstrated a normal size receptor in the
patients. Analysis of placental membranes prepared from one patient revealed no
difference in [125I]IGF-I binding. In the patients' fibroblasts, however, binding
of [125I]long [R3]-IGF-I to the IGF-I receptor was significantly reduced, as
assessed by the amount of radioactivity competed by the monoclonal antibody alpha
IR-3 or insulin and Scatchard analysis of binding data. To assess IGF-I receptor 
function, stimulation of [alpha-1-14C]-methylaminoisobutyric acid transport and
stimulation of [methyl-3H]thymidine incorporation into DNA by a full range of
IGF-I concentrations was examined in patient and control fibroblasts. There was a
significant decrease in the maximal response to IGF-I in both assays for one of
the two patients when data were expressed as fold response over the basal value. 
However, there was no evidence for impairment of response to IGF-I in either
patient's fibroblasts when data were expressed as net stimulation (maximal
response minus basal). In conclusion, although IGF-I receptor expression was
decreased in fibroblasts from two patients with deletion of the distal long arm
of chromosome 15, we were unable to provide conclusive evidence for impairment of
the biological response to IGF-I.

DOI: 10.1210/jcem.80.12.8530582 
PMID: 8530582  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 1995 Oct 30;114(1-2):193-203.

Basic fibroblast growth factor binding and processing by human glioma cells.

Murphy PR(1), Knee RS.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.

Tumor cells of glial origin express high levels of basic fibroblast growth factor
(bFGF) which stimulates their proliferation in an autocrine manner. In the
present study we examined bFGF receptor (FGFR) expression and 125I-bFGF binding
and processing in a human glioma cell line. RT-PCR demonstrated the co-expression
of bFGF and FGFR mRNAs in five glioma cell lines examined. The high-affinity FGFR
was visualized in U87-MG glioma cells by crosslinking with 125I-bFGF and by
Western blotting with anti-receptor antisera. Both techniques identified a
discrete 110-kDa moiety associated with the cell membrane, consistent with the
reported size of one of the FGFR-1 isoforms. Western blotting also identified an 
intracellular receptor pool which was not accessible with exogenous 125I-bFGF.
Suramin treatment induced a 2-fold increase in immunoreactive FGFR and a 1.5-fold
increase in 125I-bFGF binding sites, indicating that FGFRs are chronically
down-regulated by endogenous bFGF in U87-MG cells. Removal of extracellular bFGF 
with heparin resulted in a rapid, cycloheximide-sensitive increase in
high-affinity bFGF binding sites. At 37 degrees C, receptor-bound 125I-bFGF was
internalized and subjected to limited proteolytic cleavage over 12 h. U87-MG
cells also contained abundant low-affinity bFGF binding sites which were removed 
by digestion with heparinase III but not by chondroitinase ABC. The presence of
heparin (25 micrograms/ml) in the binding reaction eliminated the association of 
125I-bFGF with the heparin-like sites but did not prevent binding to the
high-affinity receptor. Scatchard binding analysis in the presence of heparin
revealed a single class of high-affinity sites in U87-MG cells (Kd = 4.9 +/- 0.9 
pM; 10-12 x 10(3) sites per cell). Neither heparin nor heparinase digestion
prevented the binding of 125I-bFGF to the detergent-extractable high-affinity
receptor, although both treatments significantly reduced the extent of 125I-bFGF 
association with the receptor. These findings indicate that in U87-MG cells,
heparan sulfate proteoglycans may be involved in presentation of bFGF to the
high-affinity receptor, but are not essential for high-affinity binding to occur.

DOI: 10.1016/0303-7207(95)96800-w 
PMID: 8674845  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


384. J Mol Biol. 1995 Oct 13;253(1):39-50.

Purification of KorA protein from broad host range plasmid RK2: definition of a
hierarchy of KorA operators.

Jagura-Burdzy G(1), Thomas CM.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, UK.

The KorA protein of promiscuous plasmid RK2 is encoded in the central control
operon, which coordinates expression of genes for replication, transfer and
partitioning. KorA is known to repress transcription from seven promoters on the 
plasmid genome but at the trfA promoter, for the vegetative replication genes, it
also causes derepression of trbAp, the first promoter for the operon whose genes 
are required primarily for mating pair formation prior to conjugative transfer.
We have overproduced and purified KorA (101 amino acid residues). Crosslinking
indicates that it exists largely as a dimer in solution. Western blotting with
specific antibodies suggests that there are approximately 4000 monomers per cell 
in exponential phase and about 600 in stationary phase. Footprinting confirmed
the expected location of the KorA operator, and indicated that KorA and RNA
polymerase can bind simultaneously in promoter regions. Gel retardation
experiments with DNA fragments carrying each of the seven KorA operators revealed
that there is a hierarchy of binding affinities. Highest affinity (Kapp = 12 to
20 nM) occurs with operators containing the 12 bp inverted repeat GTTTAGCTAAAC
(klaAp, korAp and trfAp), while lower affinities (Kapp = 136 to 272 nM) occur
with less perfect repeats (klcA, kleA, kleC, kfrA). In addition, specific DNA
sequences flanking the 12 bp are necessary for the characteristic type I KorA
binding affinity. This hierarchy may be important in providing a graded response 
in expression of the operons controlled by KorA as its concentration varies, as
for example on transition from exponential to stationary phase.

DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.1995.0534 
PMID: 7473715  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Oct 10;92(21):9702-6.

Protein crosslinking studies suggest that Rhizobium meliloti C4-dicarboxylic acid
transport protein D, a sigma 54-dependent transcriptional activator, interacts
with sigma 54 and the beta subunit of RNA polymerase.

Lee JH(1), Hoover TR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Georgia, Athens 30602, USA.

Rhizobium meliloti C4-dicarboxylic acid transport protein D (DCTD) activates
transcription by a form of RNA polymerase holoenzyme that has sigma 54 as its
sigma factor (referred to as E sigma 54). DCTD catalyzes the ATP-dependent
isomerization of closed complexes between E sigma 54 and the dctA promoter to
transcriptionally productive open complexes. Transcriptional activation probably 
involves specific protein-protein interactions between DCTD and E sigma 54.
Interactions between sigma 54-dependent activators and E sigma 54 are transient, 
and there has been no report of a biochemical assay for contact between E sigma
54 and any activator to date. Heterobifunctional crosslinking reagents were used 
to examine protein-protein interactions between the various subunits of E sigma
54 and DCTD. DCTD was crosslinked to Salmonella typhimurium sigma 54 with the
crosslinking reagents succinimidyl 4-(N-maleimidomethyl)cyclohexane-1-carboxylate
and N-hydroxysulfosuccinimidyl-4-azidobenzoate. Cys-307 of sigma 54 was
identified by site-directed mutagenesis as the residue that was crosslinked to
DCTD. DCTD was also crosslinked to the beta subunit of Escherichia coli core RNA 
polymerase with succinimidyl 4-(N-maleimidomethyl)cyclohexane-1-carboxylate, but 
not with N-hydroxysulfosuccinimidyl-4-azidobenzoate. These data suggest that
interactions of DCTD with sigma 54 and the beta subunit may be important for
transcriptional activation and offer evidence for interactions between a sigma
54-dependent activator and sigma 54, as well as the beta subunit of RNA
polymerase.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.92.21.9702 
PMCID: PMC40870
PMID: 7568201  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


386. RNA. 1995 Oct;1(8):828-40.

A UV-induced, Mg(2+)-dependent crosslink traps an active form of domain 3 of a
self-splicing group II intron.

Podar M(1), Dib-Hajj S, Perlman PS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas 75235-9038, USA.

In vitro irradiation of a15 gamma group II intron RNA with low doses of 254 nm UV
light induces a single major crosslink. This crosslink was mapped within the
domain 3 substructure of this RNA and one of the participating nucleotides was
identified. When an RNA containing only the domain 3 substructure is irradiated
under the same conditions, an intramolecular crosslink forms between two specific
pyrimidines, one of them identical to the nucleotide crosslinked in the
full-length intron RNA. In both RNAs, the crosslink is magnesium ion-dependent
and photoreversible. A trans assay for domain 3 function was developed and used
to find that the crosslinked domain 3 RNA remains highly reactive. This suggests 
that crosslinking has trapped a functional, Mg(2+)-induced folded state of this
group II intron substructure and that this folding is probably independent of the
other domains of the intron.


PMCID: PMC1369323
PMID: 7493328  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1995 Sep 14;214(2):632-8.

Male germ cell extracts contain proteins binding to the conserved 3'-end of mouse
p68 RNA helicase mRNA.

Sandhu H(1), Lemaire L, Heinlein UA.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Genetik, Heinrich-Heine-Universität, Düsseldorf, Germany.

The 3'-untranslated regions of human and mouse p68 RNA helicase mRNA are highly
conserved, suggesting a functional role of the nucleic acid sequence itself in
regulation of p68 RNA helicase expression. Secondary structure evaluations
revealed no indications for a predominant folding pattern within the 3'-UTR. To
test the potential of the 3'-sequence to serve as a target for specific binding
proteins, gel shift assays were performed. In vitro-synthesized RNA was incubated
with cytoplasmic as well as nuclear extracts from mouse male germ cells. Evidence
was obtained that such specific proteins exist in germ cell extracts.
Photo-crosslinking experiments suggested that a 30 kDa protein was involved in
these binding events.

DOI: 10.1006/bbrc.1995.2333 
PMID: 7677776  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


388. J Mol Recognit. 1995 Sep-Oct;8(5):281-9.

S1 nuclease: immunoaffinity purification and evidence for the proximity of
cysteine 25 to the substrate binding site.

Gite S(1), Shankar V.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biochemical Sciences, National Chemical Laboratory, Pune, India.

A simple procedure, involving heat treatment, gel filtration on Sephadex-G 100
followed by chromatography on anti-S1 nuclease antibodies bound to Sepharose, was
developed for purification of S1 nuclease to homogeneity with an overall yield of
72%. S1 nuclease was rapidly inactivated, at pH 6.0 and 37 degrees C, in presence
of o-phthalaldehyde. Kinetic analysis of o-phthalaldehyde medicated inactivation 
showed that the reaction followed pseudo-first-order kinetics and the loss of
enzyme activity was due to the formation of a single isoindole derivative per
molecule of the enzyme. Absorbance and fluorescence spectrophotometric data also 
gave similar results. The isoindole derivative formation, as a result of
o-phthalaldehyde treatment is known to occur through crosslinking of the thiol
group of cysteine and the epsilon-amino group of lysine, situated in close
proximity in the native enzyme. Since, modification of the only available
cysteine residue (Cys25) did not affect the catalytic activity of the enzyme, the
o-phthalaldehyde mediated inactivation of S1 nuclease is due to the modification 
of lysine. Substrates of S1 nuclease, namely ssDNA, RNA, 3'AMP, could protect the
enzyme against o-phthalaldehyde mediated inactivation. Moreover, the modified
enzyme (having very little catalytic activity) showed a significant decrease in
its ability to bind 5'AMP, a competitive inhibitor of S1 nuclease, suggesting
that the modification has occurred at the substrate binding site. The above
results point towards the presence of cysteine 25 in close proximity to the
substrate binding site.

DOI: 10.1002/jmr.300080502 
PMID: 8619949  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Blood. 1995 Aug 15;86(4):1469-80.

Absence of c-kit receptor and absent proliferative response to stem cell factor
in childhood Burkitt's lymphoma cells.

Tomeczkowski J(1), Beilken A, Frick D, Wieland B, König A, Falk MH, Reiter A,
Welte K, Sykora KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Medical School Hannover,
Germany.

The cytokine stem cell factor (SCF) synergizes with interleukin-7 (IL-7) to
enhance the proliferation of pre-B cells. To examine the role of SCF and its
receptor, c-kit, in the pathogenesis of pediatric Burkitt's lymphomas (BL), we
investigated the expression of SCF and c-kit in BL cells and the mitogenic
activity of SCF on BL cells. A panel of 13 BL cell lines and 7 fresh biopsy
tumors was investigated. BL cells were stimulated either by Epstein-Barr virus
(EBV) infection or by different reagents and cytokines, and expression of SCF and
c-kit was studied on the mRNA level by Northern blot analysis and
reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), followed by Southern
blotting. c-kit expression was also studied by fluorescence-activated cell
sorting and by crosslinking of digoxigenin-labeled recombinant human SCF to the
cell surface. Proliferation of BL cell lines was measured by 3H-thymidine
incorporation. Low-level expression of c-kit mRNA was detected in 2 of 13
unstimulated BL cell lines and in 1 fresh BL tumor. One cell line showed
upregulation of c-kit mRNA with A23187 and downregulation with phorbol myristate 
acetate. Neither c-kit nor SCF could be detected in any other cell line under any
condition of stimulation as analyzed by Northern blot analysis, RT-PCR followed
by Southern blot analysis, crosslinking, and immunofluorescence. No response to
SCF was seen in 3H-thymidine incorporation assays. We conclude that most BL cells
express neither SCF nor c-kit and that the low-level expression of c-kit in some 
BL cells most likely has no biologic significance.


PMID: 7543307  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


390. RNA. 1995 Aug;1(6):584-97.

Prp16p, Slu7p, and Prp8p interact with the 3' splice site in two distinct stages 
during the second catalytic step of pre-mRNA splicing.

Umen JG(1), Guthrie C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California, San
Francisco 94143, USA.

For the second catalytic step of pre-mRNA splicing to occur, a 3' splice site
must be selected and juxtaposed with the 5' exon. Four proteins, Prp16p, Slu7p,
Prp17p, Prp18p, and an integral spliceosomal protein, Prp8p, are known to be
required for the second catalytic step. prp8-101, an allele of PRP8 defective in 
3' splice site recognition, exhibits specific genetic interactions with mutant
alleles of the other second step splicing factors. The prp8-101 mutation also
results in decreased crosslinking of Prp8p to the 3' splice site. To determine
the role of the step-two-specific proteins in 3' splice site recognition and in
binding of Prp8p to the 3' splice site, we performed crosslinking studies in
mutant and immunodepleted extracts. Our results suggest an ordered pathway in
which, after the first catalytic step, Prp16p crosslinks strongly to the 3'
splice site and Prp8p and Slu7p crosslink weakly. ATP hydrolysis by Prp16p
affects a conformational change that reduces the crosslinking of Prp16p with the 
3' splice site and allows stronger crosslinking of Prp8p and Slu7p. Thus, the 3' 
splice site appears to be recognized in two stages during the second step of
splicing. Strong 3' splice site crosslinking of Prp8p and Slu7p also requires the
functions of Prp17p and Prp18p. Therefore, Prp8p and Slu7p interact with the 3'
splice site at the latest stage of splicing prior to the second catalytic step
that can currently be defined, and may be at the active site.


PMCID: PMC1369303
PMID: 7489518  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Nucleic Acids Res. 1995 Jun 25;23(12):2127-36.

Molecular cloning of LSIRF, a lymphoid-specific member of the interferon
regulatory factor family that binds the interferon-stimulated response element
(ISRE).

Matsuyama T(1), Grossman A, Mittrücker HW, Siderovski DP, Kiefer F, Kawakami T,
Richardson CD, Taniguchi T, Yoshinaga SK, Mak TW.

Author information: 
(1)Amgen Institute, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Interferon regulatory factor (IRF) genes encode a family of DNA-binding proteins 
that are involved in the transcriptional regulation of type-I interferon and/or
interferon-inducible genes. We report here the characterization of LSIRF, a new
member of the IRF gene family cloned from mouse spleen by the polymerase chain
reaction using degenerate primers. LSIRF was found to encode a 51 kDa protein
that shares a high degree of amino acid sequence homology in the DNA-binding
domain with other IRF family members. LSIRF expression was detectable only in
lymphoid cells. In contrast to other IRF genes, LSIRF expression was not induced 
by interferons, but rather by antigen-receptor mediated stimuli such as plant
lectins, CD3 or IgM crosslinking. In in vitro DNA binding studies, LSIRF was able
to bind to the interferon-stimulated response element (ISRE) of the MHC class I
promoter. The expression pattern and DNA binding activities suggest that LSIRF
plays a role in ISRE-targeted signal transduction mechanisms specific to lymphoid
cells.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/23.12.2127 
PMCID: PMC306999
PMID: 7541907  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


392. EMBO J. 1995 Jun 1;14(11):2602-12.

Extensive interactions of PRP8 protein with the 5' and 3' splice sites during
splicing suggest a role in stabilization of exon alignment by U5 snRNA.

Teigelkamp S(1), Newman AJ, Beggs JD.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell and Molecular Biology, University of Edinburgh, Cambridge,
UK.

Precursor RNAs containing 4-thiouridine at specific sites were used with
UV-crosslinking to map the binding sites of the yeast protein splicing factor
PRP8. PRP8 protein interacts with a region of at least eight exon nucleotides at 
the 5' splice site and a minimum of 13 exon nucleotides and part of the
polypyrimidine tract in the 3' splice site region. Crosslinking of PRP8 to mutant
and duplicated 3' splice sites indicated that the interaction is not sequence
specific, nor does it depend on the splice site being functional. Binding of PRP8
to the 5' exon was established before step 1 and to the 3' splice site region
after step 1 of splicing. These interactions place PRP8 close to the proposed
catalytic core of the spliceosome during both transesterification reactions. To
date, this represents the most extensive mapping of the binding site(s) of a
splicing factor on the substrate RNA. We propose that the large binding sites of 
PRP8 stabilize the intrinsically weaker interactions of U5 snRNA with both exons 
at the splice sites for exon alignment by the U5 snRNP.


PMCID: PMC398374
PMID: 7781612  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


393. EMBO J. 1995 Jun 1;14(11):2679-87.

Site-specific crosslinking of 4-thiouridine-modified human tRNA(3Lys) to reverse 
transcriptase from human immunodeficiency virus type I.

Mishima Y(1), Steitz JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Boyer Center for Molecular Medicine, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, CT 06536-0812, USA.

We have mapped specific RNA-protein contacts between human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV) type I reverse transcriptase (RT) and its natural primer, human tRNA(3Lys),
using a site-specific crosslinking strategy. Four different tRNA(3Lys) constructs
with a single 32P-labeled 4-thiouridine (4-thioU) residue at positions -1, 16, 36
or 41 were synthesized. After incubation with RT followed by irradiation,
crosslinks were localized to either the p66 or p51 subunit of RT by digestion
with nuclease and SDS gel fractionation. 4-thioU at position -1 or 16 transferred
label to the p66 subunit almost exclusively (> 90%), whereas position 36 labeled 
both p66 and p51 (3:1). Position 41 yielded no detectable crosslinks. The region 
of p66 contacted by position -1 of tRNA(3Lys) was localized to the 203 C-terminal
amino acids of RT by CNBr cleavage, whereas a 127 amino acid-CNBr peptide
(residues 230-357) from both p66 and p51 was labeled by position 36.
Functionality of the 4-thioU-modified tRNA(3Lys)(-1) crosslinked to RT in the
presence of an RNA but not a DNA template was demonstrated by the ability of the 
tRNA to be extended. These results localize the 5' half of the tRNA on the
interface between the two RT subunits, closer to the RNase H domain than to the
polymerase active site, in accord with previous suggestions. They argue further
that a specific binding site for the 5' end of the primer tRNA(3Lys) may exist
within the C-terminal portion of the p66 subunit, which could be important for
the initiation of reverse transcription.


PMCID: PMC398382
PMID: 7540137  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 May 23;92(11):5012-6.

NusA interferes with interactions between the nascent RNA and the C-terminal
domain of the alpha subunit of RNA polymerase in Escherichia coli transcription
complexes.

Liu K(1), Hanna MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Botany and Microbiology, University of Oklahoma, Norman 73019,
USA.

The effects of NusA on the RNA polymerase contacts made by nucleotides at
internal positions in the nascent RNA in Escherichia coli transcription complexes
were analyzed by using the photocrosslinking nucleotide analog
5-[(4-azidophenacyl) thio]-UMP. It was placed at nucleotides between +6 and +15
in RNA transcribed from the phage lambda PR' promoter. Crosslinks of analog in
these positions in RNAs which contained either 15, 28, 29, or 49 nt were
examined. Contacts between the nascent RNA and proteins in the transcription
complex were analyzed as the RNA was elongated, by placing the crosslinker
nearest the 5' end of the RNA 10, 23, 24, or 44 nt away from the 3' end. The beta
or beta' subunit of polymerase, and NusA when added, were contacted by RNA from
15 to 49 nt long. When the upstream crosslinker was 24 nt from the 3" end of the 
RNA (29-nt RNA), alpha was also contacted in the absence of NusA. The addition of
NusA prevented RNA crosslinking to alpha. When the crosslinker was 44 nt from the
3' end (49-nt RNA), alpha crosslinks were still observed, but crosslinks to beta 
or beta' and NusA were greatly diminished. RNA crosslinking to alpha, and loss of
this crosslink when NusA was added, was observed in the presence of NusB, NusE,
and NusG and when transcription was carried out in the presence of an E. coli
S100 cell extract. Peptide mapping localized the RNA interactions to the
C-terminal domain of alpha.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.92.11.5012 
PMCID: PMC41838
PMID: 7539140  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Apr 25;92(9):3869-73.

Bacteriophage T7 helicase/primase proteins form rings around single-stranded DNA 
that suggest a general structure for hexameric helicases.

Egelman EH(1), Yu X, Wild R, Hingorani MM, Patel SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroanatomy, University of Minnesota Medical
School, Minneapolis 55455, USA.

Most helicases studied to date have been characterized as oligomeric, but the
relation between their structure and function has not been understood. The
bacteriophage T7 gene 4 helicase/primase proteins act in T7 DNA replication. We
have used electron microscopy, three-dimensional reconstruction, and protein
crosslinking to demonstrate that both proteins form hexameric rings around
single-stranded DNA. Each subunit has two lobes, so the hexamer appears to be
two-tiered, with a small ring stacked on a large ring. The single-stranded DNA
passes through the central hole of the hexamer, and the data exclude substantial 
wrapping of the DNA about or within the protein ring. Further, the hexamer binds 
DNA with a defined polarity as the smaller ring of the hexamer points toward the 
5' end of the DNA. The similarity in three-dimensional structure of the T7 gene 4
proteins to that of the Escherichia coli RuvB helicase suggests that polar rings 
assembled around DNA may be a general feature of numerous hexameric helicases
involved in DNA replication, transcription, recombination, and repair.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.92.9.3869 
PMCID: PMC42063
PMID: 7731998  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Nucleic Acids Res. 1995 Apr 11;23(7):1231-8.

Preparation of probe-modified RNA with 5-mercapto-UTP for analysis of protein-RNA
interactions.

He B(1), Riggs DL, Hanna MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Botany/Microbiology, University of Oklahoma, Norman 73019, USA.

We report a modified synthesis for 5-mercapto-UTP (5-SH-UTP) and its use for
analysis of protein-RNA interactions utilizing Escherichia coli and T7 RNA
polymerases and yeast RNA polymerases I and III. 5-SH-UTP did not affect
transcriptional pausing, Rho-independent termination or recognition of the E.
coli transcription complex by NusA. RNA containing 5-SH-UMP did not crosslink to 
polymerase when irradiation was 302 or 337 nm. Transcription complexes containing
RNA substituted with 5-SH-UMP were post-transcriptionally modified to attach a
photocross-linking group to thiol-tagged nucleotides in the RNA on the surface of
the polymerase of free in solution. The pKa for 5-SH-UTP was determined to be
5.6, so modification of the thiol groups in the RNA with p-azidophenacyl bromide 
could be carried out at pH 7. Addition of the transcription termination factor
Rho, a RNA binding protein, to E. coli transcription complexes resulted in RNA
crosslinking to Rho and to the beta and beta' subunits of polymerase. Using
5-SH-UTP, one can distinguish RNA binding domains on the surface of RNA
polymerases or other RNA binding proteins from those buried within the protein.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/23.7.1231 
PMCID: PMC306836
PMID: 7537876  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Photochem Photobiol. 1995 Apr;61(4):360-6.

Using cell-fractionation and photochemical crosslinking methods to determine the 
cellular binding site(s) of the antitumor drug DMP 840.

Chatterjee PK(1), Sternberg NL.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Group, DuPont Merck Pharmaceutical Company, Glenolden, PA
19036, USA.

In order to understand its mechanism of action we have begun an effort to better 
define the cellular target of action of the experimental antitumor agent DMP 840 
(NSC D640430; (R,R)-2,2'-(1,2-ethanediylbis(imino-(1-methyl-2,1-ethanediyl)))-bi 
s(5- nitro-1H-benz(de)isoquinoline-1,3-(2H)-dione) dimethanesulfonate). Using a
combination of gentle cell fractionation procedures and a previously unidentified
photochemical crosslinking reaction, we have shown that after the drug is added
to cultured Clone A cells, more than 80% of the drug that is found associated
with cells partitions to the chromatin-containing structural framework of the
cell and that the primary target after crosslinking with 360 nm light is DNA.
While DMP 840 photoreacts quite efficiently with purified RNA in vitro, no
photoattachment of the drug to RNA was observed in cells. In vitro photochemical 
studies also reveal that while GC-rich DNA is a preferred target for drug
interaction, AT-rich DNA is more active in the photochemical crosslinking
reaction. These results suggest that DMP 840 probably kills cells by interfering 
with DNA-metabolic processes, and that the drug and its derivatives are likely to
be useful photoactive molecular probes for investigating higher order chromatin
structures in cells.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1751-1097.1995.tb08623.x 
PMID: 7740079  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


398. J Cell Sci. 1995 Apr;108 ( Pt 4):1651-7.

Nuclear distribution of Drosophila DNA topoisomerase II is sensitive to both
RNase and DNase.

Meller VH(1), Fisher PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacological Sciences, State University of New York at Stony 
Brook 11794-8651, USA.

The nuclear distribution of Drosophila DNA topoisomerase II was determined by
immunoblot analysis after nuclease digestion and cell fractionation. About 60% of
DNA topoisomerase II could be removed from nuclei by RNase A, about 70% by DNase 
I, and about 90% by incubation with both enzymes together or with micrococcal
nuclease. Nuclease treatment of nuclei did not affect the distribution of lamins 
Dm1 and Dm2 or other nuclear proteins similarly. Nuclease-mediated solubilization
of DNA topoisomerase II from Drosophila nuclei was also dependent on NaCl
concentration. Solubilization was not efficient below 100 mM NaCl. Sucrose
velocity gradient ultracentrifugation demonstrated that DNA topoisomerase II
solubilized from nuclei by either RNase A or DNase I migrated at about 9 S, as
expected for the homodimer. Results of chemical crosslinking supported this
observation. We conclude that DNA topoisomerase II has both RNA- and
DNA-dependent anchorages in Drosophila embryo nuclei.


PMID: 7615683  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Mar 14;92(6):2375-8.

Negative transcriptional regulation in anergic T cells.

Becker JC(1), Brabletz T, Kirchner T, Conrad CT, Bröcker EB, Reisfeld RA.

Author information: 
(1)Scripps Research Institute, Department of Immunology, La Jolla, CA 92037.

Anergy is a mechanism of T-lymphocyte tolerance induced by antigen-receptor
stimulation in the absence of costimulation, whereby T cells exhibit a defect in 
antigen-induced transcription of the interleukin 2 (IL-2) gene. Here we present
evidence for a mechanism of negative IL-2 gene regulation in anergic T cells.
High amounts of binding activity to the negative regulatory element A (NRE-A) of 
the IL-2 promotor were detected in nuclear extracts from human T cells shortly
after induction of anergy. Rapid induction of this nuclear complex is blocked by 
cyclosporin A and is found to be independent of protein synthesis. Plasmid DNAs, 
containing either the human phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate-responsive element
(PRE) or both NRE-A and PRE, were used as template for in vitro transcription
assays in the presence of T-cell nuclear extracts. Under these conditions nuclear
extracts from both anergic and rested T-cell clones, after crosslinking of CD3
and CD28, induced transcription of plasmids containing only PRE. However, when
plasmids containing NRE-A and PRE were used, transcription was only induced by
nuclear extracts from rested but not anergic T cells. These findings suggest the 
functional relevance of transcriptional repression of the IL-2 gene in anergic T 
cells.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.92.6.2375 
PMCID: PMC42486
PMID: 7892274  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Nucleic Acids Res. 1995 Mar 11;23(5):835-43.

Cabeza, a Drosophila gene encoding a novel RNA binding protein, shares homology
with EWS and TLS, two genes involved in human sarcoma formation.

Stolow DT(1), Haynes SR.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

We have previously described a partial Drosophila cDNA, clone P19, which bears
homology to members of the RNA recognition motif (RRM) family of proteins [Haynes
et al. (1987) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 84, 1819-1823]. RNA binding as well as 
involvement in RNA processing has been demonstrated for some RRM proteins. We
report here the further characterization of P19, which we renamed cabeza (caz).
caz is located on the X chromosome at position 14B. Using Northern analysis, at
least four transcripts from the caz gene were observed at varying levels during
development. caz mRNA and protein are enriched in the brain and central nervous
system during embryogenesis. In addition, the protein is enriched in the adult
head. UV crosslinking was used to demonstrate in vitro RNA binding activity for
full-length recombinant caz protein and for the caz RRM domain. Sequence analysis
revealed caz is related to two human genes, EWS and TLS, which are involved in
chromosomal translocations. The fusion of EWS and TLS to other cellular genes
results in sarcoma formation. In addition to their overall structural
organization and sequence similarity, these three genes share an RRM which is
divergent from typical RRMs. Therefore, it appears that these genes constitute a 
new sub-family of RNA binding proteins.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/23.5.835 
PMCID: PMC306767
PMID: 7708500  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


401. J Biol Chem. 1995 Feb 24;270(8):4031-6.

The U1 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein/5' splice site interaction affects U2AF65 
binding to the downstream 3' splice site.

Côté J(1), Beaudoin J, Tacke R, Chabot B.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Microbiologie, Faculté de Médecine, Université de Sherbrooke,
Québec, Canada.

In the gene of the neural cell adhesion molecule, the 5' splice site of the
alternate exon 18 plays an important role in establishing regulated splicing
profiles. To understand how the 5' splice site of exon 18 contributes to splicing
regulation, we have investigated the interaction of the U2AF65 splicing factor to
pre-mRNAs that contained portions of the constitutive exon 17 or the alternate
exon 18 fused to exon 19 and separated by a shortened intron. Despite sharing an 
identical 3' splice site, only the pre-mRNA that contained a portion of exon 17
and its associated 5' splice site displayed efficient U2AF65 cross-linking.
Strikingly, a G-->U mutation at position +6 of the intron, converting the 5'
splice site of exon 18 into that of exon 17, stimulated U2AF65 crosslinking. The 
improved cross-linking efficiency of U2AF65 to a pre-mRNA carrying the 5' splice 
site of exon 17 required the integrity of the 5' end of U1 but not of U2 small
nuclear RNA. Our results indicate that neural cell adhesion molecule 5' splice
site sequences influence U2AF65 binding through a U1 small nuclear
ribonucleoprotein/U2AF interaction that occurs at the commitment stage of
spliceosome assembly, before stable binding of the U2 small nuclear
ribonucleoprotein. Thus, the 5' splice sites of exons 17 and 18 differentially
affect U2AF65 binding to the 3' splice site of exon 19. Factors that modulate U1 
small nuclear ribonucleoprotein binding to these 5' splice sites may play a
critical role in regulating exon 18 skipping.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.270.8.4031 
PMID: 7876151  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Nature. 1995 Feb 2;373(6513):444-8.

Fas(CD95)/FasL interactions required for programmed cell death after T-cell
activation.

Ju ST(1), Panka DJ, Cui H, Ettinger R, el-Khatib M, Sherr DH, Stanger BZ,
Marshak-Rothstein A.

Author information: 
(1)Arthritis Center, Boston University School of Medicine, Massachusetts 02118.

Comment in
    Nature. 1995 Feb 2;373(6513):385-6.

Receptor crosslinking of T-cell hybridomas induces cell activation followed by
apoptosis. This activation-induced cell death requires de novo synthesis of RNA
and proteins, but the actual gene products that provide the death signal have not
been identified. We show here that receptor crosslinking induces Fas ligand and
upregulates Fas, and that the ensuing engagement of Fas by Fas ligand activates
the cell-death programme. Cell death, but not activation, can be selectively
prevented by a soluble Fas-immunoglobulin fusion protein. Thus, Fas and Fas
ligand are the death-gene products, and their interaction accounts for the
molecular mechanism of activation-induced T-cell death.

DOI: 10.1038/373444a0 
PMID: 7530337  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Biochem Mol Biol Int. 1995 Feb;35(2):375-85.

Expression and DNA-binding properties of the 14K carboxyl terminal fragment of
Escherichia coli DNA topoisomerase I.

Zhu CX(1), Samuel M, Pound A, Ahumada A, Tse-Dinh YC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, New York Medical College,
Valhalla 10595, USA.

DNA sequence coding for the last 121 amino acids of Escherichia coli
topoisomerase I was synthesized by PCR and cloned into a plasmid under the
control of the T7 promoter. Induction of T7 RNA polymerase in E. coli carrying
the plasmid clone resulted in over-expression of this C-terminal domain fragment 
previously shown to confer higher DNA binding affinity to the enzyme.
Purification to homogeneity was achieved by phosphocellulose and single-stranded 
DNA agaraose chromatography. Direct interaction between this 14K domain and
poly(dA) was demonstrated by UV spectroscopy. Noncovalent complexes formed
between this fragment and oligo(dT) 8 and oligo(dT) 16 can also be trapped by
photo-crosslinking.


PMID: 7663393  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 1995;21(3):182-91.

Expression of the Fanconi anemia gene FAC in human cell lines: lack of effect of 
oxygen tension.

Joenje H(1), Youssoufian H, Kruyt FA, dos Santos CC, Wevrick R, Buchwald M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Free University, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Fanconi anemia (FA) is a recessively inherited disease characterized by bone
marrow failure, congenital anomalies, chromosomal instability and
hypersensitivity to crosslinking agents. Some of the cellular defects of FA are
known to be responsive to the ambient oxygen concentration. We examined the
responsiveness of the FA complementation group C (FAC) gene to changes in oxygen 
concentration using two types of human cell lines, hypoxia-responsive Hep3B
hepatoma cells and Epstein-Barr virus-immortalized lymphoblasts (normal and FA
complementation groups B and C). Although the expression of erythropoietin in
Hep3B cells was induced in response to the hypoxia-mimicking agent CoCl₂, there
was no concomitant induction in FAC expression as assessed by mRNA levels and
immunoprecipitable protein, and no detectable change in the cytoplasmic location 
of the FAC polypeptide as determined by indirect immunofluorescence. In human
lymphoblasts we examined the effect of oxygen (0.1% -95% O₂) on cell
proliferation and FAC expression. FA lymphoblasts had a normal sensitivity to the
cytostatic effect of hyperoxia, while in both control and FA lymphoblasts FAC
mRNA levels were unaffected by oxygen. Our results indicate that ambient oxygen
is not a regulator of the FAC gene.

DOI: 10.1006/bcmd.1995.0021 
PMID: 8673470  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Environ Mol Mutagen. 1995;25(1):4-11.

Preferential effects of the chemotherapeutic DNA crosslinking agent mitomycin C
on inducible gene expression in vivo.

Caron RM(1), Hamilton JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, 
NH 03755-3835.

The immediate effects of a single dose of the chemotherapeutic DNA crosslinking
agent, mitomycin C (MMC), on the expression of several constitutive and
drug-inducible genes were examined in a simple in vivo system, the 14 day chick
embryo. We observed no effect of MMC on the steady-state mRNA expression of the
constitutively expressed beta-actin, transferrin, or albumin genes. In contrast, 
MMC treatment significantly altered both the basal and drug-inducible mRNA
expression of two glutethimide-inducible genes, 5-aminolevulinic acid (ALA)
synthase and cytochrome P450 CYP2H1. The basal expression of these genes was
transiently but significantly increased over a 24 hr period following a single
dose of MMC. Conversely, MMC significantly suppressed the glutethimide-inducible 
expression of these genes when administered 1 to 24 hr prior to the inducing
drug. The effects of MMC on both basal and drug-inducible ALA synthase and CYP2H1
mRNA expression were principally a result of changes in the transcription rates
of these genes. In contrast, MMC treatment had little or no effect on
glutethimide-induced expression of ALA synthase or CYP2H1 when administered 1 hr 
after the inducing drug, suggesting that a very early event in the induction
process represents the target for these MMC effects. Covalent binding studies
demonstrated that the effects of MMC on gene expression were closely correlated
temporally with formation of [3H]-porfiromycin-DNA adducts. These results support
the hypothesis that genotoxic chemicals specifically target their effects to
inducible genes in vivo.


PMID: 7875125  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Blood. 1995 Jan 1;85(1):179-85.

A translocated erythropoietin receptor gene in a human erythroleukemia cell line 
(TF-1) expresses an abnormal transcript and a truncated protein.

Winkelmann JC(1), Ward J, Mayeux P, Lacombe C, Schimmenti L, Jenkins RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine,
OH.

We previously identified a translocation breakpoint in exon 8 of the
erythropoietin receptor (EpoR) gene in TF-1 cells, a cell line derived from a
human erythroleukemia. To investigate the potential pathogenetic significance of 
this abnormality, we more precisely mapped the breakpoint within exon 8 and
studied the expression of the translocated gene by S1 nuclease mapping of EpoR
transcripts and chemical crosslinking of labeled erythropoietin (Epo) to TF-1
cell surface receptors. Transcripts from the abnormal gene were found to be
highly expressed in relation to normal EpoR transcripts in TF-1 cells. The
breakpoint predicted by S1 mapping of abnormal EpoR transcripts agreed closely
with that determined by Southern analysis. Chemical cross-linking of 125I-Epo to 
TF-1 cells showed an abnormal, low-molecular-weight cross-linked species directly
recognized by anti-EpoR antibodies and present in considerable excess over the
normal EpoR. Karyotype analysis showed that each of 10 TF-1 cell metaphases had, 
in addition to multiple other alterations, one chromosome 19 with additional
chromosomal material translocated onto the short arm at 19p13.3, the location of 
the EpoR gene. We conclude that the structurally abnormal EpoR gene in TF-1 cells
is highly expressed and produces an abnormal protein. We speculate that the
chromosomal material brought into the EpoR locus by translocation is responsible 
for the high level of expression. We hypothesize that this translocation
participated in the evolution of the erythroleukemia from which TF-1 cells were
derived.


PMID: 7803793  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Nucleic Acids Res. 1994 Dec 25;22(25):5582-9.

Binding of Y-box proteins to RNA: involvement of different protein domains.

Ladomery M(1), Sommerville J.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological and Medical Sciences, University of St Andrews, Fife, UK.

Eukaryotic Y-box proteins are reported to interact with a wide variety of nucleic
acid structures to act as transcription factors and mRNA masking proteins. The
modular structure of Y-box proteins includes a highly conserved N-terminal
cold-shock domain (CSD, equivalent to the bacterial cold-shock proteins) plus
four basic C-terminal domains containing arginine clusters and aromatic residues.
In addition, the basic domains are separated by acidic regions which contain
several potential sites for serine/threonine phosphorylation. The interaction of 
Y-box proteins, isolated from Xenopus oocytes (FRGY2 type), with RNA molecules
has been studied by UV crosslinking and protein fragmentation. We have identified
two distinct binding activities. The CSD interacts preferentially with the
polypurines poly(A,G) and poly(G) but not poly(A), this activity being sensitive 
to 5 mM MgCl2 but not to 5 mM spermidine. In the presence of 1 mM MgCl2 or 1 mM
spermidine, the basic domains interact preferentially with poly(C,U), this
activity being sensitive to 0.5 M NaCl. Binding of the basic domains is also
sensitive to low concentrations of heparin. The basic domains can be crosslinked 
individually to labelled RNA. These results are discussed with reference to the
various specificities noted in the binding of Y-box proteins to RNA and DNA.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/22.25.5582 
PMCID: PMC310120
PMID: 7530842  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Electrophoresis. 1994 Dec;15(12):1493-8.

Gel dependence of electrophoretic mobilities of double-stranded and viroid RNA
and estimation of the contour length of a viroid by gel electrophoresis.

Gast FU(1), Sänger HL.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Viroidforschung, Max-Planck-Institut für Biochemie,
Planegg-Martinsried, Germany.

Double-stranded (ds) RNA normally exhibits a lower electrophoretic mobility than 
dsDNA having the same number of base pairs. This has been attributed to its net
charge density that is lower than that of B-form DNA. But we show here that dsRNA
runs faster than corresponding DNA in gels containing either > or = 2.5% agarose 
or > or = 8% acrylamide with high crosslinking (19:1
acrylamide:N,N'-methylenebisacrylamide). However, the relative mobility of dsRNA 
as compared with DNA, extrapolated to 0% gel (0%T), remains constant (0.90 +/-
0.03) in all systems, in support of the charge density hypothesis. In comparison 
to dsRNA standards, the potato spindle tuber viroid, a small approximately 70%
base-paired rod-like pathogenic RNA, is strongly retarded, presumably because of 
greater flexibility and/or stable curvature. Depending on the gel system,
nonlinear extrapolation to 0% T leads to an apparent contour length of 140-230
bp, whereas 130 +/- 20 bp can be determined from electron micrographs and 123-126
bp from secondary structure modeling. We attribute the variation of the
electrophoretic behavior of both dsRNA and viroid RNA to interactions with the
gel matrix. Nevertheless, extrapolation of the apparent contour length (in bp
dsRNA) determined from low-crosslinked polyacrylamide gels (2.6%C) is comparable 
to the determination by alternative methods.


PMID: 7720685  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Mol Biol (Mosk). 1994 Nov-Dec;28(6):1376-82.

[Detection of nonhistone proteins, bound with regulatory elements of yeast rRNA
genes, by UV-crosslinks in intact nuclei].

[Article in Russian]

Papatsenko DA, Priporova IV, Kukarin AV, Preobrazhenskaia OV, Karpov VL,
Mirzabekov AD.

We have studied the arrangement of DNA-binding proteins along yeast ribosomal
non-transcribed spacer by UV-induced DNA-protein crosslinking on intact nuclei.
We show binding of proteins with apparent Mw 120 and 30 kDa in promoter region,
120 kDa in enhancer region, 40 kDa in ARS. These proteins were identified
preliminary as REB1 (promoter, enhancer), TFID (promoter), MCM3 (ARS). Good
agreement between information supplied by this technics and literature data prove
usefulness of our approach and make possibility for its wide appliance.


PMID: 7885337  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


410. FEBS Lett. 1994 Oct 3;352(3):331-4.

Plant proteins that bind to the 3'-terminal sequences of the negative-strand RNA 
of three diverse positive-strand RNA plant viruses.

Hayes RJ(1), Pereira VC, Buck KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Imperial College of Science, Technology and Medicine,
London, UK.

The replication of positive-strand RNA plant viruses, which involves both
virus-encoded and plant-encoded proteins, takes place in two stages: synthesis of
a negative-strand RNA using the genomic positive-strand RNA as a template and
synthesis of progeny positive-strand RNA using the negative-strand RNA as a
template. Using gel mobility shift and photochemical crosslinking assays, we have
identified three proteins of M(r) 32K, 50K and 100K in extracts of tobacco and
spinach leaves that bind to the 3'-terminal sequences of the negative-strand RNA 
of three diverse positive-strand RNA plant viruses. The 32K protein was purified 
to near homogeneity by chromatography on columns of Macro-prep high Q,
heparin-sepharose, single-stranded DNA cellulose and poly(U)-sepharose. No
binding of any of the three proteins to the 3'-termini of the positive-strand RNA
or the 5'-termini of the positive-strand RNA or negative-strand RNA of any of the
three viruses, or the 3'-termini of the mRNAs of two chloroplast genes, psbA or
petD, could be detected. We propose that 3'-terminal negative-strand RNA binding 
proteins, which may be widespread in the plant kingdom, could be utilised by at
least three different positive-strand RNA plant viruses for the initiation of
positive-strand RNA synthesis.

DOI: 10.1016/0014-5793(94)00986-4 
PMID: 7925996  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Eur J Biochem. 1994 Oct 1;225(1):419-32.

The rat growth hormone proximal silencer contains a novel DNA-binding site for
multiple nuclear proteins that represses basal promoter activity.

Roy RJ(1), Vallières L, Leclerc S, Guérin SL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Endocrinology, CHUL Research Center, Ste-Foy, Québec, 
Canada.

Cell-type-specific expression of the rat growth hormone (rGH) gene is determined 
by the interaction of both positive as well as negative regulatory proteins with 
cis-acting elements located upstream of the rGH mRNA start site. We have recently
shown that the rat liver transcription factor NF1-L binds to the proximal rGH
silencer (called silencer-1) to repress its transcriptional activity. However,
this single factor proved to be insufficient by itself to confer cell-specific
gene repression. We therefore attempted to identify other regulatory proteins
interacting with silencer 1, which might be needed to achieve full cell-specific 
repression of that gene. A common recognition site for three yet uncharacterized 
nuclear proteins (designated as SBP1, SBP2 and SBP3) which bind a DNA sequence
adjacent to the NF1-L-binding site in the rGH silencer-1 element were identified.
UV crosslinking of DNA/protein complexes and nuclear protein
fractionation/renaturation from SDS/polyacrylamide gels further indicated that
the molecular masses for SBP1-3 are 41, 26 and 17 kDa respectively, the major
species being the 26-kDa protein (SBP2) which account for 83% of the shifted SBP 
double-stranded oligonucleotide in gel mobility-shift assays. For this reason,
most of this study focussed on the characterization of SBP2. We demonstrated that
binding of NF1-L and SBP2 to their respective recognition sequence is a mutually 
exclusive event. Although an SBP-binding activity has been found in every
non-pituitary tissue or cell line tested, no such activity could be detected in
either rat pituitaries or rat pituitary GH4C1 cells. Insertion of the SBP element
upstream of the basal promoter of the mouse p12 heterologous gene resulted in a
consistent decrease in chloramphenicol acetyl transferase reporter gene
expression following transient transfections in non-pituitary cells only,
suggesting that the related SBP1-3 proteins might be involved in generally
repressing gene transcription in a cell-specific manner.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1994.00419.x 
PMID: 7925464  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


412. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim. 1994 Oct;30A(10):653-63.

Nuclear accumulation of exogenous basic fibroblast growth factor in endothelial, 
fibroblast, and myoblast cell lines results in diverse biological responses.

Hawker JR Jr(1), Granger HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Microcirculation Research Institute, College of Medicine, Texas A&M University
Health Science Center, College Station 77843.

During studies comparing 125I-bFGF internalization between endothelial cells and 
other cell types, we found, unexpectedly, internalization and nuclear
translocation of exogenously added 125I-bFGF in two cell lines: Chinese hamster
ovary cells (CHO) and rat L6 myoblasts. These cell lines were previously reported
to be devoid of FGF receptors. Furthermore, CHO cells showed a weak mitogenic
response to added bFGF, while L6 cells were mitogenically unresponsive. By
comparison, coronary venular endothelial cells (CVEC), BALB/c 3T3 fibroblasts,
and BHK-21 cells, demonstrated internalization and nuclear translocation of added
125I-bFGF, and mitogenic responsiveness to the growth factor. Insulin alone
stimulated DNA synthesis in all cell types, yet augmented bFGF-dependent DNA
synthesis only in CVEC, 3T3, and BHK. All five cell types expressed FGF receptors
as assessed by covalent crosslinking with 125I-bFGF and immunoblotting with
anti-FGF receptor antibodies. Differing rates of cytoplasmic and nuclear
accumulation of 125I-bFGF and partial inhibition of internalization by
pretreatment of CVEC with chlorate support a recent model that bFGF can
internalize by two mechanisms. Insulin did not significantly affect 125I-bFGF
internalization or metabolism in any cell type. bFGF treatment resulted in weak
inhibition of RNA synthesis in L6 cells. bFGF appears firmly bound to the nuclear
matrix as little nuclear-bound 125I-bFGF in CVEC is released by DNAse I or RNAse 
A digestion, while washes with 0.5 M NaCl result in partial release. Nuclear bFGF
may thus be involved in regulation of nuclear events (e.g., gene transcription
and/or DNA replication).


PMID: 7531096  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Nucleic Acids Res. 1994 Sep 25;22(19):3880-6.

Molecular basis of nitrogen mustard effects on transcription processes: role of
depurination.

Masta A(1), Gray PJ, Phillips DR.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biochemistry, La Trobe University, Bundoora, Victoria, Australia.

DNA was alkylated with nitrogen mustard (HN2) and the rate of release of the
alkylpurines was quantitated by HPLC. The half life of depurination of the major 
product (7-alkylguanine) was 9.1 h at 37 degrees C. End-labelled DNA was used to 
show that depurination occurred dominantly at 5'-GA, 5'-GG and 5'-GT sequences.
Although extensive alkylation was observed at all 5'-GNC and 5'GNT sequences, no 
depurination was observed at these sites during a depurination time of 20 h at 37
degrees C. Since these sites are potential interstrand crosslinking sequences
(G-adduct-G and G-adduct-A, both spanning an intervening base pair), this
suggests that these regions have a greatly enhanced stability or that
simultaneous depurination of both ends of the crosslink is necessary before these
lesions are removed (with a predicted half-life of approximately 80 h at 37
degrees C). Depurination at the lac UV5 promoter impaired the association of
Escherichia coli RNA polymerase with that promoter, while in the elongation phase
two distinctly different sequence-specific processes were apparent. At 5'-GNC and
5'-GNT sequences transcriptional blockages were maintained with increasing
elongation time, whereas at monoadduct sites, the blockage decreased with
elongation time (predominantly at 5'-GG and 5'-GC sequences), with an average
half-life of approximately 10.7 h. Collectively, these results suggest that the
observed read-through past monoadduct sites is due to depurination of the DNA at 
those sites. E. coli RNA polymerase is therefore able to transcribe efficiently
past apurinic sites and presumably does so by incorporating an incorrect base
into the nascent RNA.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/22.19.3880 
PMCID: PMC308384
PMID: 7937107  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Nucleic Acids Res. 1994 Sep 25;22(19):3854-60.

Polypyrimidine tract sequences direct selection of alternative branch sites and
influence protein binding.

Norton PA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Roger Williams Medical Center, Providence, RI 02908.

IVS1, an intron derived from the rat fibronectin gene, is spliced inefficiently
in vitro, involving the use of three alternative branch sites. Mutation of one
branch point site, BP3, so as to increase complementarity to U2 snRNA resulted in
exclusive use of that site and improved splicing efficiency, indicating that the 
wild type BP3 site is one determinant of poor IVS1 splicing. Deletions within the
polypyrimidine tract had a variable effect on splicing efficiency and altered the
pattern of branch site usage. Selection of each branch site was influenced
negatively by purine substitutions ca. 20 nucleotides downstream. It is proposed 
that all three IVS1 branch sites are pyrimidine tract-dependent. Pyrimidine tract
deletions also influenced the crosslinking of PTB (the polypyrimidine
tract-binding protein), hnRNP C, and splicing factor U2AF65. All three proteins
bound preferentially to distinct regions within the polypyrimidine tract and thus
are candidates for mediating pyrimidine tract-dependent branch site selection.
The findings indicate the complexity of the IVS1 polypyrimidine tract and suggest
a crucial role for this region in modulating branch site selection and IVS1
splicing.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/22.19.3854 
PMCID: PMC308380
PMID: 7937104  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


415. EMBO J. 1994 Sep 1;13(17):4113-25.

The association of the U1-specific 70K and C proteins with U1 snRNPs is mediated 
in part by common U snRNP proteins.

Nelissen RL(1), Will CL, van Venrooij WJ, Lührmann R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

The U1 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein particle (snRNP)-specific 70K and A
proteins are known to bind directly to stem-loops of the U1 snRNA, whereas the
U1-C protein does not bind to naked U1 snRNA, but depends on other U1 snRNP
protein components for its association. Focusing on the U1-70K and U1-C proteins,
protein-protein interactions contributing to the association of these
particle-specific proteins with the U1 snRNP were studied. Immunoprecipitation of
complexes formed after incubation of naked U1 snRNA or purified U1 snRNPs lacking
their specific proteins (core U1 snRNP) with in vitro translated U1-C protein,
revealed that both common snRNP proteins and the U1-70K protein are required for 
the association of U1-C with the U1 snRNP. Binding studies with various in vitro 
translated U1-70K mutants demonstrated that the U1-70K N-terminal domain is
necessary and sufficient for the interaction of U1-C with core U1 snRNPs.
Surprisingly, several N-terminal fragments of the U1-70K protein, which lacked
the U1-70K RNP-80 motif and did not bind naked U1 RNA, associated stably with
core U1 snRNPs. This suggests that a new U1-70K binding site is generated upon
association of common U1 snRNP proteins with U1 RNA. The interaction between the 
N-terminal domain of U1-70K and the core RNP domain was specific for the U1
snRNP; stable binding was not observed with core U2 or U5 snRNPs, suggesting
essential structural differences among snRNP core domains. Evidence for direct
protein-protein interactions between U1-specific proteins and common snRNP
proteins was supported by chemical crosslinking experiments using purified U1
snRNPs. Individual crosslinks between the U1-70K and the common D2 or B'/B
protein, as well as between U1-C and B'/B, were detected. A model for the
assembly of U1 snRNP is presented in which the complex of common proteins on the 
RNA backbone functions as a platform for the association of the U1-specific
proteins.


PMCID: PMC395334
PMID: 8076607  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Photochem Photobiol. 1994 Sep;60(3):225-30.

Photoactivated gilvocarcin V induces DNA-protein crosslinking in genes for human 
ribosomal RNA and dihydrofolate reductase.

Matsumoto A(1), Fujiwara Y, Elespuru RK, Hanawalt PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Biophysics and Genetics, Kobe University, School of
Medicine, Japan.

The nature of DNA interactions with photoactivated gilvocarcin V has been
analyzed at the gene level in both rRNA and dihydrofolate reductase genes of
human fibroblasts, utilizing a modified Southern hybridization technique. Neither
interstrand DNA crosslinking nor RNA linkage to DNA was detected. However, we
consistently observed in both genes retarded DNA bands appearing in a
dose-dependent fashion following exposure to photoactivated gilvocarcin V. These 
retarded bands were enhanced when genomic DNA was prepared without proteinase K
treatment, suggesting involvement of protein in this DNA interaction. Because
these bands disappear following proteinase K treatment, it is probable that
photoactivated gilvocarcin V induces DNA-protein crosslinking.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1751-1097.1994.tb05095.x 
PMID: 7972373  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1994 Aug 30;203(1):392-9.

Identification of a strong transcriptional activator for the copia
retrotransposon responsible for its differential expression in Drosophila hydei
and melanogaster cell lines.

Cavarec L(1), Jensen S, Heidmann T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Gustave Roussy, CNRS URA147 & INSERM U140, Villejuif, France.

We have characterized the regulatory properties of a 72bp sequence located in the
5' untranslated domain of the Drosophila copia retrotransposon, 3' to the left
LTR, by transient transfection assays with cell lines derived from either
Drosophila hydei (DH33 cells) or Drosophila melanogaster (Schneider II and Kc
cells). Reporter plasmids were constructed which contained the lacZ gene under
the control of either the entire copia LTR with 5' untranslated domain, or a
minimal heterologous promoter flanked with the identified copia regulatory
sequences. Upon transfection into the copia-free DH33 cells, the presence of the 
72bp sequence resulted for all reporter plasmids in a 100-700 fold increase in
expression level -as well as in reporter gene RNA levels- whereas this sequence
had no enhancing effect upon transfection of the same plasmids into the
copia-containing Schneider II or Kc cells. Moreover, mobility shift assays with
the 72bp enhancer sequence disclosed two specific bands of retarded mobility with
whole-cell extracts from DH33 cells, whereas no retarded band could be detected, 
under identical conditions, with extracts from Schneider II cells. UV
crosslinking experiments between the enhancer sequence and DH33 extracts revealed
a single protein species -of app. mol. wt. 50kD- for both retarded bands, thus
strongly suggesting that they simply correspond to the sequential binding of two 
identical factor molecules to the enhancer sequence. These data demonstrate that 
the copia-free D. hydei cells express a strong transcriptional activator for the 
copia element and possible interpretations for the absence of this factor in the 
copia-containing D. melanogaster cells are discussed in terms of a possible
"adaptation" of the "host" (D. melanogaster) to an otherwise highly mutagenic
"parasite" (copia with its transcription factor).

DOI: 10.1006/bbrc.1994.2195 
PMID: 8074683  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Aug 2;91(16):7817-21.

Contacts of the globular domain of histone H5 and core histones with DNA in a
"chromatosome".

Hayes JJ(1), Pruss D, Wolffe AP.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Embryology, National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892.

The globular domain of histone H5 is found to asymmetrically associate with a
nucleosome core including the Xenopus borealis somatic 5S RNA gene. Histones H2A 
and H2B are required for association of histone H5. Strong crosslinking of the
globular domain of histone H5 to the 5S DNA in the nucleosome occurs at a single 
site to one side of the dyad axis. This site is also in contact with the core
histones, and the interactions of the core histones with 5S DNA change as a
result of association of the globular domain of histone H5. We discuss evidence
for an allosteric change in core histone-5S DNA interactions following the
association of the linker histone in the nucleosome.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.91.16.7817 
PMCID: PMC44493
PMID: 8052665  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Virology. 1994 Aug 1;202(2):803-13.

The rotavirus RNA-binding protein NS35 (NSP2) forms 10S multimers and interacts
with the viral RNA polymerase.

Kattoura MD(1), Chen X, Patton JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Miami School of
Medicine, Florida 33101.

The gene 8 product of SA11 rotavirus, NS35 (NSP2), is a nonspecific RNA-binding
protein that accumulates in cytoplasmic inclusions (viroplasms) and is required
for genome replication. To gain additional information on the role of NS35 in
virus replication, lysates of simian rotavirus SA11-infected cells were treated
with the thio-cleavable crosslinking agent, dithiobis(succinimidyl propionate)
(DSP). Gel electrophoresis of NS35-specific immunoprecipitates recovered from the
crosslinked lysates indicated that infected cells contained NS35 multimers, the
largest consisting of four or more molecules of the protein. Sedimentation
analysis of NS35 expressed in rabbit reticulocyte lysates by cell-free
translation and in vTF7-3-infected cells by transfection with a gene 8-containing
transcription vector showed that NS35 assembles into multimers of approximately
10S and that the formation of the multimers does not require other viral
proteins. The 10S multimers were also detected in rotavirus-infected cells,
providing evidence that they function in virus replication. The lack of RNase
sensitivity indicates that the 10S multimers probably lack an RNA component.
However, by an NS35-specific RNA capture assay, the multimers were shown to
possess the RNA-binding activity previously demonstrated for NS35. Despite its
ability to multimerize and bind RNA, indirect immunofluorescence assays showed
that when transiently expressed in cells, NS35 alone is not sufficient to induce 
the formation of viroplasms. DSP-crosslinking of infected cell lysates and
immunoprecipitation also revealed that NS35 interacts with the putative viral RNA
polymerase VP1. Analysis of cytoplasmic extracts resolved by sedimentation on
glycerol gradients suggested that the VP1-NS35 complexes are soluble and
RNA-free. Complexes formed from NS35 multimers, VP1, and viral messenger RNA may 
function to coordinate RNA packaging and the assembly of viral cores.

DOI: 10.1006/viro.1994.1402 
PMID: 8030243  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


420. J Chromatogr A. 1994 Jul 29;676(1):99-112.

High-performance liquid chromatography and photoaffinity crosslinking to explore 
the binding environment of nevirapine to reverse transcriptase of human
immunodeficiency virus.

Palladino DE(1), Hopkins JL, Ingraham RH, Warren TC, Kapadia SR, Van Moffaert GJ,
Grob PM, Stevenson JM, Cohen KA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Analytical Sciences, Boehringer Ingelheim Pharmaceuticals, Inc.,
Ridgefield, CT 06877-0368.

Nevirapine (BI-RG-587) is a potent inhibitor of the polymerase activity of
reverse transcriptase of human immunodeficiency virus type-1. Nevirapine, as well
as several other non-nucleoside compounds of various structural classes, bind
strongly at a site which includes tyrosines 181 and 188 of the p66 subunit of
reverse transcriptase. The chromatography which was utilized to explore this
binding site is described. BI-RH-448 and BI-RJ-70, two tritiated photoaffinity
azido analogues of nevirapine, are each crosslinked to reverse transcriptase. The
use of several HPLC-based techniques employing different modes of detection makes
it possible to demonstrate a dramatic difference between the two azido analogues 
in crosslinking behavior. In particular, by comparing HPLC tryptic peptide maps
of the photoadducts formed between reverse transcriptase and each azido analogue,
it can be shown that crosslinking with BI-RJ-70 but not with BI-RH-448 is more
localized, stable, and hence exploitable for the identification of the
specifically bonded amino acid residue(s). In addition, comparison of the tryptic
maps also makes it feasible to assess which rings of the nevirapine structure are
proximal or distal to amino acid side chains of reverse transcriptase. Finally,
another feature of the HPLC peptide maps is the application of on-line detection 
by second order derivative UV absorbance spectroscopy to identify the crosslinked
amino acid residue.

DOI: 10.1016/0021-9673(94)80458-3 
PMID: 7522840  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


421. J Biol Chem. 1994 Jul 8;269(27):18090-5.

Probing close DNA contacts of RNA polymerase III transcription complexes with the
photoactive nucleoside 4-thiodeoxythymidine.

Bartholomew B(1), Braun BR, Kassavetis GA, Geiduschek EP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla
92093-0634.

Photoactive 4-thiodeoxythymidine 5'-triphosphate (4-S-dTTP) has been synthesized 
and used to enzymatically incorporate the corresponding nucleotide,
4-thiodeoxythymidine 5'-phosphate (4-S-dTMP), at specific positions of the
Saccharomyces cerevisiae 5 S rRNA and SUP4 tRNA(Tyr) genes. RNA polymerase III
transcription complexes have been assembled on this DNA and analyzed by
photocrosslinking for proteins making close contact with DNA. Comparison DNA
probes with a long-tether photoactive nucleotide
5-[N-(p-azidobenzoyl)-3-aminoallyl]-dUMP (N3RdUMP) incorporated at the same
positions have also been analyzed, in order to compare the properties of these
two crosslinking reagents. At least 10 of the 16 different S. cerevisiae
polymerase III subunits make direct contact with DNA. The 120-kDa subunit of
transcription factor (TF)IIIC, which is thought to play the key role in
positioning TFIIIB upstream of the transcriptional start site, also contacts DNA 
near the transcriptional start site in TFIII(C+B) complexes with a SUP4 tRNA(Tyr)
gene. The photocrosslinking patterns generated by 4-S-dTMP and N3RdUMP are
distinctive, implying that these two reagents can yield complementary information
about the structures of complex protein assemblies on DNA. Surprisingly, some
subunits of the S. cerevisiae RNA polymerase III are crosslinked by 4-S-dTMP but 
not by N3RdUMP.


PMID: 8027070  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Nature. 1994 Jul 7;370(6484):75-7.

Phosphorylation of RNA polymerase II C-terminal domain and transcriptional
elongation.

O'Brien T(1), Hardin S, Greenleaf A, Lis JT.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Biochemistry, Molecular and Cell Biology, Cornell University,
Ithaca, New York 14853.

The carboxy-terminal domain (CTD) of the large subunit of RNA polymerase II is
essential in vivo, and is found in either an unphosphorylated (IIa) or
hyperphosphorylated (IIo) form. The Drosophila uninduced hsp70 and hsp26 genes,
and the constitutively expressed beta-1 tubulin and Gapdh-2 genes, contain an RNA
polymerase II complex which pauses after synthesizing a short transcript. We
report here that, using an in vivo ultraviolet crosslinking technique and
antibodies directed against the IIa and IIo forms of the CTD, these paused
polymerases have an unphosphorylated CTD. For genes containing a 5' paused
polymerase, passage of the paused RNA polymerase into an elongationally competent
mode in vivo coincides with phosphorylation of the CTD. Also, the level of
phosphorylation of the CTD of elongating polymerases is shown not to be related
to the level of transcription, but is promoter specific.

DOI: 10.1038/370075a0 
PMID: 8015613  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Mamm Genome. 1994 Jul;5(7):438-45.

Molecular cloning of mouse erythrocyte protein 4.2: a membrane protein with
strong homology with the transglutaminase supergene family.

Rybicki AC(1), Schwartz RS, Qiu JJ, Gilman JG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine-Montefiore Medical
Center, Bronx, New York 10467.

We report the molecular cloning and characterization of mouse erythrocyte protein
4.2 (P4.2). Mouse erythrocyte P4.2 is a 691-amino-acid protein with a predicted
MW of 77 kDa. Northern blot analysis detected a 2.2-kb transcript in mouse
reticulocytes, compared with a 2.4- to 2.5-kb transcript in human reticulocytes, 
which is consistent with the absence of the 30-amino-acid splicing insert in
mouse erythrocyte P4.2 that is found in the human protein (isoform I). Like the
human erythrocyte P4.2, mouse erythrocyte P4.2 contains regions strikingly
homologous with the transglutaminase (TGase) proteins although it too most likely
lacks TGase crosslinking activity. Mouse P4.2 is on average 73% identical with
human erythrocyte P4.2, although regional variations exist, with greatest
conservation in the regions of the molecule that contain the TGase active site,
the TGase calcium-binding site, and a band 3 binding site. Hydropathy analysis
reveals a protein containing a series of hydrophobic domains, similar to the
situation for human P4.2 and consistent with its tight binding to the membrane,
although the mouse P4.2 is missing both the strongly hydrophilic region and
adjacent highly charged region that are present in the human protein, suggesting 
that the two proteins could differ in their physical characteristics, binding
associations, or functional properties. The availability of the complete mouse
erythrocyte P4.2 cDNA should help in the design of P4.2-deficient animal models
(for example, ribozyme or homologous recombinant "knockout" models) that should
accelerate the understanding of P4.2 function in both erythroid and non-erythroid
cells.

DOI: 10.1007/bf00357005 
PMID: 7919657  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


424. J Cell Physiol. 1994 Jun;159(3):531-41.

Human osteosarcoma (U-2 OS) cells express both insulin-like growth factor-I
(IGF-I) receptors and insulin-like growth factor-II/mannose-6-phosphate
(IGF-II/M6P) receptors and synthesize IGF-II: autocrine growth stimulation by
IGF-II via the IGF-I receptor.

Raile K(1), Höflich A, Kessler U, Yang Y, Pfuender M, Blum WF, Kolb H, Schwarz
HP, Kiess W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Children's Hospital, University of
Munich, Germany.

Recently, insulin-like growth factor-I and -II (IGF-I and -II) have been
implicated in the growth promotion of tumors in vivo and tumor cells in vitro. We
have studied the human osteosarcoma cell line U-2 OS in order 1) to gain more
insight into the growth promoting actions of the IGFs and 2) to establish an in
vitro tissue culture model of IGF action in human tumor cells. Specific binding
of 125I-IGF-I and 125I-IGF-II to IGF-I receptors and IGF-II/mannose-6-phosphate
(M6P) receptors on U-2 OS cells was demonstrated in competitive binding
experiments and in affinity crosslinking experiments. Western blotting of cell
extracts confirmed the expression of the IGF-II/M6P receptor. In addition, in
Northern blotting experiments using total RNA from U-2 OS cells IGF-I receptor
RNA of 11 kb and IGF-II/M6P receptor RNA of approximately 9 kb were detected.
Solution hybridization experiments confirmed the presence of IGF-I receptor and
IGF-II/M6P receptor RNA. In a subset of experiments DNA synthesis was measured as
3H-thymidine uptake into cellular DNA of U-2 OS cells. Normal rat serum
stimulated DNA synthesis maximally. IGF-I-deficient serum from hypophysectomized 
rats as well as IGF-I or IGF-II without serum were approximately twofold and
tenfold, respectively, less potent than serum in stimulating 3H-thymidine uptake.
The concentrations of IGF-I and IGF-II needed for half maximal stimulation of DNA
synthesis corresponded well with the respective concentrations required for half 
maximal inhibition of 125I-IGF-I binding to U-2 OS cells. The anti-IGF-I receptor
antibody alpha IR3 blocked the IGF-I and IGF-II stimulated increase of
3H-thymidine uptake. In addition, basal DNA synthesis was partially inhibited by 
the anti-IGF-I receptor antibody. These data suggest that U-2 OS cells synthesize
and secrete IGF-like peptides. Northern blotting experiments confirmed that U-2
OS cells express an IGF-II RNA species of 5.3 kb but no IGF-I transcripts. In a
series of RNase protection assays, protected RNA fragments were detected with an 
IGF-II riboprobe. Also, cell-conditioned medium from U-2 OS cells contained 1-2
ng/ml IGF-II immunoreactivity as measured in an IGF-binding protein blocked
IGF-II radioimmunoassay.IN CONCLUSION: 1) U-2 OS cells express IGF-I and
IGF-II/M6P receptors. 2) U-2 OS tumor cells respond to the addition of exogenous 
IGF-I and IGF-II with an increase of DNA synthesis.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400
WORDS)

DOI: 10.1002/jcp.1041590317 
PMID: 8188767  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


425. EMBO J. 1994 Jun 1;13(11):2611-6.

TBP-associated factors interact with DNA and govern species specificity of RNA
polymerase I transcription.

Rudloff U(1), Eberhard D, Tora L, Stunnenberg H, Grummt I.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology of the Cell II, German Cancer Research Center,
Heidelberg.

Unlike genes transcribed by RNA polymerases II and III, transcription by RNA
polymerase I is highly species-specific. Ribosomal promoter selectivity is
brought about by a multisubunit transcription factor (SL1/TIF-IB) which consists 
of the TATA-binding protein (TBP) and three TBP-associated factors (TAFs). To
determine the basis for the inability of SL1/TIF-IB to recognize heterologous
rDNA, the transcriptional properties and the subunit composition of the murine
and the human factor, as well as a chimeric complex containing epitope-tagged
human TBP and murine TAFs, have been compared. We show that TBP can be exchanged 
between the human and mouse factor indicating that the variable N-terminal domain
of TBP does not play a significant role in rDNA promoter selectivity. Instead,
DNA binding is brought about by the TAFs. UV crosslinking experiments demonstrate
that binding to the ribosomal gene promoter is mediated by two TAFs (TAFI48 and
TAFI68) which have the same electrophoretic mobility in the human and mouse
factor. The largest TAF is different in both species and is suggested to play a
role in the species-specific assembly of productive preinitiation complexes.
Thus, evolutionary changes of rDNA promoter sequences have been accompanied by
changes in specific TAFs.


PMCID: PMC395135
PMID: 8013460  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


426. EMBO J. 1994 May 1;13(9):2167-76.

Ly-6A is required for T cell receptor expression and protein tyrosine kinase fyn 
activity.

Lee SK(1), Su B, Maher SE, Bothwell AL.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06520-8011.

To characterize the function of the Ly-6A antigen in T cell activation, antisense
Ly-6 RNA was expressed in a stably transfected antigen-specific T cell clone.
Reduced Ly-6A expression results in inhibition of responses to antigen, anti-TCR 
(anti-T cell receptor) crosslinking and concanavalin A plus recombinant
interleukin 1 and causes impairment of in vitro fyn tyrosine kinase activity.
More substantial reduction of Ly-6A results in reduction of TCR expression.
Analysis of mRNA species indicates that the reduction is specific for the TCR
beta chain. These data demonstrate that Ly-6A may regulate TCR expression and may
be involved in early events of T cell activation via regulation of fyn tyrosine
kinase activity.


PMCID: PMC395070
PMID: 8187770  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 1994 May;65(1):147-59.

The role of dityrosine formation in the crosslinking of CUT-2, the product of a
second cuticlin gene of Caenorhabditis elegans.

Lassandro F(1), Sebastiano M, Zei F, Bazzicalupo P.

Author information: 
(1)International Institute of Genetics and Biophysics, Naples, Italy.

A second cuticlin gene, cut-2, of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, has been
isolated and its genomic and cDNA sequences determined. The gene codes for a
component of cuticlin, the insoluble residue of nematode cuticles. Conceptual
translation of cut-2 reveals a 231-amino acid secreted protein which, like CUT-1,
begins with a putative signal peptide of 16 residues. The central part of the
protein consists of 13 repetitions of a short hydrophobic motif, which is often
degenerated with substitutions and deletions. Parts of this motif are present
also in CUT-1 (Caenorhabditis elegans) as well as in several protein components
of the larval cuticle and of the eggshell layers of various insects (Locusta
migratoria, Ceratitis capitata and Drosophila species). These sequence
similarities are related to the similar functions of these proteins: they are all
components of extracellular insoluble protective layers. Immunolocalisation and
transcription analysis suggest that CUT-2 contributes to the cuticles of all
larval stages and that it is not stage-specific. Analysis by reverse
transcriptase-PCR suggests that it is not stage-specific. Analysis by reverse
transcriptase-PCR suggests that transcription is not continuous throughout larval
development but occurs in peaks which precede the moults. Dityrosine has been
detected in the cuticle of nematodes and of insects; formation of dityrosine
bridges may be one of the cross-linking mechanisms contributing to the
insolubility of cuticlins. Recombinant, soluble CUT-2 is shown to be an excellent
substrate for an in vitro cross-linking reaction, catalysed by horseradish
peroxidase in the presence of H2O2, which results in the formation of insoluble, 
high-molecular weight CUT-2 and of dityrosine.

DOI: 10.1016/0166-6851(94)90123-6 
PMID: 7935621  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


428. EMBO J. 1994 May 1;13(9):2211-7.

A novel RNA gene in the tobacco plastid genome: its possible role in the
maturation of 16S rRNA.

Vera A(1), Sugiura M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Gene Research, Nagoya University, Japan.

A small plastid-encoded RNA (spRNA, 218 nt) has been detected in tobacco. The
corresponding locus (sprA) does not contain any open reading frame and is
actively transcribed from its own promoter, as shown by ribonuclease protection
assays using in vitro capped RNAs. Gel-shift and UV-crosslinking experiments
showed the formation of a specific complex between spRNA and chloroplast
polypeptides. The mobility of the complex was further shifted when a transcript
bearing part of the 16S rRNA leader sequence was added to the incubation mixture.
Glycerol gradient fractionation of a chloroplast lysate indicated a preferential 
sedimentation of spRNA at 15-20S and 70S. These observations, and the potential
base-pairing with the leader sequence of pre-16S rRNA, suggest a role for spRNA
in chloroplast ribosome biogenesis, i.e. 16S rRNA maturation. By sequencing of
tomato plastid DNA and heterologous northern hybridizations, the presence of sprA
homologs and their expression in a number of dicot plants have also been shown.


PMCID: PMC395076
PMID: 7514532  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1994 Apr 29;200(2):993-8.

Alternative RNA splicing of calcitonin/calcitonin gene-related peptide minigene
transcripts in a thyroid C-cell line.

Cote GJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Specialties, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston 77030.

RNA transcripts derived from the calcitonin (CT)/calcitonin gene-related peptide 
(CGRP) gene are differentially processed in a tissue-specific fashion to produce 
two unique mRNAs. This RNA processing decision is deregulated in malignant
thyroid C-cells. To examine this mechanism of RNA processing, CT/CGRP minigene
constructs were transfected into the human medullary thyroid carcinoma TT cell
line. RNA derived from the normal CT/CGRP construct paralleled the endogenous
pathway to produce both CT and CGRP mRNAs. Mutation analysis and RNA/protein
crosslinking were performed in order to clarify trans-acting factor interactions.
The data suggest that CGRP production in TT cells results from the coexpression
of facilitative and inhibitory factors.

DOI: 10.1006/bbrc.1994.1548 
PMID: 8179637  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Nucleic Acids Res. 1994 Mar 25;22(6):1119-20.

A simple procedure for visualising protein-nucleic acid complexes by
photochemical crosslinking.

Buck M(1), Cannon W.

Author information: 
(1)Agricultural and Food Research Council, University of Sussex, Brighton, UK.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/22.6.1119 
PMCID: PMC307940
PMID: 8152917  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Nucleic Acids Res. 1994 Mar 11;22(5):807-14.

Protein/DNA crosslinking of a TFIID complex reveals novel interactions downstream
of the transcription start.

Sypes MA(1), Gilmour DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, Pennsylvania State University,
University Park 16802.

A protein--DNA complex containing TFIID has been analyzed by crosslinking. The
TBP subunit of TFIID crosslinked to the TATA element but not to any of the
regions further downstream which were tested. A 150 kd polypeptide, which
corresponds in size to one of the TBP-associated factors (TAFs), crosslinked to a
region between +10 and +15 and a second region between +35 and +47. Another
polypeptide of greater than 205 kd (also a potential TAF) crosslinked
preferentially to the region between +35 and +42. The +10 to +15 region has been 
recently implicated in hsp70 promoter recognition by TFIID, and the most
downstream contacts overlap with the region where RNA polymerase II pauses on the
hsp70 promoter in noninduced cells. Crosslinking revealed that as the salt
concentration was increased, the TBP interaction was largely unaffected whereas
the protein/DNA interactions downstream of the TATA element were disrupted. We
propose that during the formation of a transcription complex, TATA-dependent
interactions could be disrupted in the vicinity of the start site and the region 
immediately downstream. A protein contact downstream of +35 might function in
pausing polymerase.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/22.5.807 
PMCID: PMC307886
PMID: 8139922  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


432. EMBO J. 1994 Mar 1;13(5):1197-204.

RNA binding specificity of hnRNP A1: significance of hnRNP A1 high-affinity
binding sites in pre-mRNA splicing.

Burd CG(1), Dreyfuss G.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine, Philadelphia 19104-6148.

Pre-mRNA is processed as a large complex of pre-mRNA, snRNPs and pre-mRNA binding
proteins (hnRNP proteins). The significance of hnRNP proteins in mRNA biogenesis 
is likely to be reflected in their RNA binding properties. We have determined the
RNA binding specificity of hnRNP A1 and of each of its two RNA binding domains
(RBDs), by selection/amplification from pools of random sequence RNA. Unique RNA 
molecules were selected by hnRNP A1 and each individual RBD, suggesting that the 
RNA binding specificity of hnRNP A1 is the result of both RBDs acting as a single
RNA binding composite. Interestingly, the consensus high-affinity hnRNP A1
binding site, UAGGGA/U, resembles the consensus sequences of vertebrate 5' and 3'
splice sites. The highest affinity 'winner' sequence for hnRNP A1 contained a
duplication of this sequence separated by two nucleotides, and was bound by hnRNP
A1 with an apparent dissociation constant of 1 x 10(-9) M. hnRNP A1 also bound
other RNA sequences, including pre-mRNA splice sites and an intron-derived
sequence, but with reduced affinities, demonstrating that hnRNP A1 binds
different RNA sequences with a > 100-fold range of affinities. These experiments 
demonstrate that hnRNP A1 is a sequence-specific RNA binding protein. UV
light-induced protein-RNA crosslinking in nuclear extracts demonstrated that an
oligoribonucleotide containing the A1 winner sequence can be used as a specific
affinity reagent for hnRNP A1 and an unidentified 50 kDa protein. We also show
that this oligoribonucleotide, as well as two others containing 5' and 3'
pre-mRNA splice sites, are potent inhibitors of in vitro pre-mRNA splicing.


PMCID: PMC394929
PMID: 7510636  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1994 Feb 17;1220(3):329-32.

cDNA cloning and sequence analysis of the bovine adrenocorticotropic hormone
(ACTH) receptor.

Raikhinstein M(1), Zohar M, Hanukoglu I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hormone Research, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot,
Israel.

We isolated five independent cDNAs of nearly 3000 bp for the bovine ACTH receptor
by screening adrenal cortex cDNA libraries with a PCR cloned cDNA fragment. The
deduced receptor sequence includes 297 residues (M(r) = 33,258) with 81% identity
with the human ACTH receptor, and shows seven hydrophobic transmembrane domains. 
The calculated M(r) of the receptor is smaller than the 40-45 kDa observed in
crosslinking studies with labeled ACTH. Since the bovine and human receptors have
two glycosylation motifs in the N-terminus, the difference may result from
glycosylation of the receptor. Analysis of the sequences of both bovine and human
receptors revealed a single protein kinase. A phosphorylation motif located in
the third intracellular loop (Ser-209) juxtaposed to a protein kinase C
phosphorylation motif (Thr-204). Thus, the involvement of protein kinase A and C 
pathways in ACTH action may be mediated in part by phosphorylation of the ACTH
receptor at these motifs. The 3'-untranslated region of the bovine cDNA is > 2000
bp and includes two inverse repeats giving an extensive and strong secondary
structure to the ACTH receptor RNA.

DOI: 10.1016/0167-4889(94)90157-0 
PMID: 8305507  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Chem Biol Interact. 1994 Feb;90(2):169-83.

Inhibition of DNA topoisomerase I activity by 2',5'-oligoadenylates and
mismatched double-stranded RNA in uninfected and HIV-1-infected H9 cells.

Schröder HC(1), Kelve M, Schäcke H, Pfleiderer W, Charubala R, Suhadolnik RJ,
Müller WE.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Angewandte Molekularbiologie, Johannes Gutenberg-Universität, Mainz,
Germany.

2',5'-Oligoadenylates (2-5As) inhibit the type I DNA topoisomerase activity both 
in uninfected and HIV-1-infected human T cell line H9 as well as the purified
enzyme (calf thymus). Topoisomerase I activity was determined by measuring the
relaxation of negatively supercoiled pBR322 DNA. Inhibition of topoisomerase I by
2-5A depends on the chain length of the oligomer and the presence of
5'-phosphate. The 5'-triphosphate of the 2-5A hexamer was most active (almost
total inhibition of DNA relaxation at 10 microM concentration); the 2-5A core
trimer (at 100 microM) displayed no significant effect. In crosslinking and
immunoprecipitation experiments we present evidence that 2-5A (32P-labelled 2-5A 
derivative, ppp(A2'p)3 A[32P]pCp) is able to bind to nuclear topoisomerase I. The
mismatched dsRNA, poly(I).poly(C12U) (Ampligen), exhibited a strong anti-HIV-1
activity. However, our data show that this antiviral effect is not related to
topoisomerase I inhibition. On the other hand, we did observe the production of
longer oligomers of 2-5A in cells treated with poly(I).poly(C12U). It remains
speculative, whether the in vivo effect could be catalyzed by this activity of
poly(I).poly(C12U). In addition we could show that 2-5A also inhibits
topoisomerase I activity associated with isolated HIV-1 particles.

DOI: 10.1016/0009-2797(94)90101-5 
PMID: 8156606  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


435. J Exp Med. 1994 Feb 1;179(2):503-12.

NF-kappa B and I kappa B alpha: an inducible regulatory system in endothelial
activation.

Read MA(1), Whitley MZ, Williams AJ, Collins T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.

Structural analysis of the promoters of several endothelial genes induced at
sites of inflammatory or immune responses reveals binding sites for the
transcription factor nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappa B). Endothelial cells
express transcripts encoding the p50/p105 and p65 components of NF-kappa B and
the rel-related proto-oncogene c-rel; steady state levels of these transcripts
are transiently increased by tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha). Western
blotting revealed that stimulation of endothelial cells with TNF-alpha resulted
in nuclear accumulation of the p50 and p65 components of NF-kappa B. Ultraviolet 
crosslinking and immunoprecipitation demonstrated binding of the p50 and p65
components of NF-kappa B to the E-selectin kappa B site. Endothelial cells
express an inhibitor of NF-kappa B activation, I kappa B-alpha (MAD-3). Protein
levels of this inhibitor fall rapidly after TNF-alpha stimulation. In parallel,
p50 and p65 accumulate in the nucleus and RNA transcript levels for I kappa
B-alpha are dramatically upregulated. Recombinant p65 stimulates expression of
E-selectin promoter-reporter constructs. I kappa B-alpha inhibits p65 or
TNF-alpha-stimulated E-selectin promoter-reporter gene expression in transfected 
endothelial cells. The NF-kappa B and I kappa B-alpha system may be an inducible 
regulatory mechanism in endothelial activation.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.179.2.503 
PMCID: PMC2191350
PMID: 7507507  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Mol Immunol. 1994 Jan;31(1):21-30.

Induction of phosphatidylinositol turnover and EGR-1 mRNA expression by
crosslinking of surface IgM and IgD in the human B cell line B104.

Kanazashi S(1), Hata D, Ishigami T, Jung EY, Shintaku N, Sumimoto S, Heike T,
Katamura K, Mayumi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Kyoto University, Japan.

We have previously shown that a human B lymphoma cell line, B104, expressed
surface IgM (sIgM) and surface IgD (sIgD), and that crosslinking of sIgM and sIgD
by anti-IgM antibody (Ab) and anti-IgD Ab, respectively, induced Ca2+ influx to
almost the same degree, whereas only sIgM-crosslinking caused B104 cell death.
Here, we investigated the accumulation of cyclic AMP (cAMP), the hydrolysis of
inositol phosphates, protein kinase C (PKC) activity and the induction of Egr-1
and c-fos mRNA expression by sIgM- and sIgD-crosslinking to examine differences
in the signals mediated through sIgM and sIgD in B104 cells. Both sIgM- and
sIgD-crosslinking with antibodies induced elevation of cAMP levels,
phosphatidylinositol turnover, PKC activation and expression of Egr-1 and c-fos
mRNA, although sIgM-crosslinking was more effective than sIgD-crosslinking,
presumably due to the higher expression of sIgM than of sIgD. Egr-1 mRNA
expression induced by sIgM- and sIgD-crosslinking was inhibited by H7, erbstatin 
and genistein, but not by HA1004. Erbstatin and genistein inhibited the
sIg-crosslinking-induced Egr-1 mRNA expression in a dose-dependent manner
parallel to that observed in the inhibition of sIg-crosslinking-induced protein
tyrosine phosphorylation. Phorbol myristate acetate induced Egr-1 mRNA expression
but forskolin and dibutyryl cyclic AMP did not. These findings suggest that the
Egr-1 mRNA activating signals through sIgM and sIgD are protein tyrosine kinase- 
and PKC-dependent, but protein kinase A-independent. Cyclosporin A (CsA) and
FK506 rescued B104 cells from death induced by anti-IgM Ab, but did not affect
the expression of Egr-1 and c-fos mRNA, showing that CsA and FK506 affect signal 
transducers differently from or downstream to these molecules. The difference in 
signals transduced through sIgM and sIgD in B104 cells is discussed.

DOI: 10.1016/0161-5890(94)90134-1 
PMID: 8302296  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Mol Microbiol. 1994 Jan;11(2):227-36.

Identification of a DNA-contacting surface in the transcription factor sigma-54.

Cannon W(1), Claverie-Martin F, Austin S, Buck M.

Author information: 
(1)Agricultural and Food Research Council, University of Sussex, Brighton, UK.

The transcription factor sigma-54 (sigma 54) is a sequence-specific DNA-binding
protein that directs RNA polymerase to a particular class of promoter. The
interaction of sigma 54 with promoter DNA has been analysed by protein-DNA
crosslinking and enzymatic and chemical proteolysis. Direct physical evidence for
a DNA-contacting surface within the carboxy-terminal one-third of the protein has
been obtained. This region of sigma 54 is likely to be close to the surface of
the protein, and contacts DNA when either sigma 54 or the sigma 54-holoenzyme
bind specifically to promoter DNA. The amino-terminal region of sigma 54 appears 
to be highly susceptible to proteolysis, and its integrity influences the
accessibility towards proteolysis of a second region of sigma 54, which includes 
the DNA-contacting surface. Thus the amino-terminal region of sigma 54 may have a
role in influencing its DNA-binding properties, the major determinants of which
appear to reside in the carboxy-terminal one-third of the protein.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.1994.tb00303.x 
PMID: 8170385  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Receptor. 1994 Fall;4(3):143-55.

Functional expression of a mouse growth hormone receptor cDNA in transfected
mouse L cells.

Zhou Y(1), Xu B, Wang X, Chen WY, Kopchick JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Ohio University, Athens 45701.

A cDNA encoding a full-length mouse (m) growth hormone receptor (GHR) derived
from 3T3 F442A cells was amplified by RT-PCR and cloned into a mammalian
expression vector. A mouse L cell line (mGHR1.6), which expresses high levels of 
full-length mGHR, was established. A mGHR-specific mRNA of approx 2.8 kb was
found in these cells. Ligand binding studies showed that mGHR 1.6 cells were
capable of binding 125I-hGH with a dissociation constant (Kd) of 2.9 +/- 0.13 nM.
Scatchard analysis indicated that mGHR1.6 cells had only a single class of mGHR
and possessed approx 128,000 GH specific binding sites per cell. Affinity
crosslinking studies showed that the recombinant mGHR possessed an apparent
molecular mass of 105 kDa. In addition, mGHR1.6 cells responded to growth
hormones (GHs) from several species. Two proteins, pp92 and pp95, were found to
be tyrosyl phosphorylated following GH treatment. An hGH antagonist, hGH-G120R,
inhibited GH-induced phosphorylation of both pp92 and pp95 in a dose-dependent
manner. This cell line may be used as an in vitro model in the studies of GH
signal transduction and in the screening of GH analogs for biological activity.


PMID: 7529079  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 Dec 1;90(23):11322-6.

Structure and promoter characterization of the gene encoding the large subunit
(R1 protein) of mouse ribonucleotide reductase.

Björklund S(1), Hjortsberg K, Johansson E, Thelander L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of Umeå, Sweden.

Comment on
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 Dec 1;90(23):10907-8.

Mammalian ribonucleotide reductase (EC 1.17.4.1) is composed of two nonidentical 
subunits, proteins R1 and R2, both required for enzyme activity. The structure of
the genomic mouse ribonucleotide reductase R1 gene was compiled from a number of 
overlapping lambda clones isolated from a Charon 4A mouse sperm genomic library. 
The R1-encoding gene covers 26 kb and consists of 19 exons. All exon-intron
boundaries were located by dideoxynucleotide sequencing, showing that intron 7
starts with the variant GC instead of GT. About 3.5 kb of DNA from the
5'-flanking region of the R1-encoding gene were cloned and sequenced, and the
transcriptional start site was determined by nuclease S1 mapping of RNA. DNase I 
footprinting assays on the R1 promoter identified two nearly identical 23-bp-long
protein-binding regions. Three protein complexes binding to one of the 23-mer
regions were resolved and partially identified by using gel-retardation
mobility-shift assays and UV crosslinking. One complex most likely contained Sp1,
and another complex showed S-phase-specific binding, suggesting a direct role in 
the cell-cycle-dependent R1 gene expression.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.90.23.11322 
PMCID: PMC47974
PMID: 8248246  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Science. 1993 Nov 19;262(5137):1255-7.

Photocrosslinking of 5-iodouracil-substituted RNA and DNA to proteins.

Willis MC(1), Hicke BJ, Uhlenbeck OC, Cech TR, Koch TH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Colorado, Boulder
80309.

5-Iodouracil-substituted RNA and DNA were crosslinked regiospecifically to
associated proteins in yields of 70 to 94% of bound nucleic acid. Irradiation of 
the iodouracil chromophore with monochromatic, long-wavelength ultraviolet
radiation (325 nanometers) eliminates excitation of other nucleic acid and
protein chromophores. The combination of high crosslinking yields, excellent
specificity, and elimination of photodamage to other chromophores represents an
important advance toward the precise identification of contacts in nucleoprotein 
complexes.

DOI: 10.1126/science.7694369 
PMID: 7694369  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Mol Immunol. 1993 Nov;30(16):1553-8.

Effects of IL-4 and Fc gamma receptor II engagement on Egr-1 expression during
stimulation of B lymphocytes by membrane immunoglobulin crosslinking.

Klaus SJ(1), Phillips NE, Parker DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester 01655.

Egr-1 is an immediate early gene that is rapidly upregulated in response to
mitogenic signals induced by antigen receptor crosslinking on murine B
lymphocytes. It has been shown that levels of Egr-1 expression are closely
correlated with B cell proliferation in several models of B cell activation and
tolerance. We compared the expression of Egr-1 during B cell stimulation with
Fab'2 and IgG anti-immunoglobulin (anti-Ig), since it is known that Fab'2 anti-Ig
is mitogenic while IgG anti-Ig is not, owing to a dominant inhibitory effect of
crosslinking the B cell Fc gamma RII to membrane Ig. While mitogenic doses of
Fab'2 anti-Ig induce large and rapid increases in Egr-1 expression, IgG anti-Ig
results in smaller increases in Egr-1 mRNA, comparable to that seen with
submitogenic concentrations of Fab'2 anti-Ig. However, the correlation between
Egr-1 expression and B cell proliferation breaks down when IL-4 is added as a
co-mitogen to induce B cell proliferation with IgG anti-Ig or submitogenic
concentrations of Fab'2 anti-Ig. No corresponding increases in Egr-1 mRNA levels 
are observed when IL-4 is added. Therefore, IL-4 overcomes Fc receptor-mediated
inhibition of B cell proliferation without affecting inhibition of Egr-1 mRNA
induction, as demonstrated earlier for c-myc mRNA in this system.

DOI: 10.1016/0161-5890(93)90463-l 
PMID: 8232340  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


442. J Exp Med. 1993 Nov 1;178(5):1745-51.

Immature thymocytes become sensitive to calcium-mediated apoptosis with the onset
of CD8, CD4, and the T cell receptor expression: a role for bcl-2?

Andjelić S(1), Jain N, Nikolić-Zugić J.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York 10021.

During intrathymic negative selection by clonal deletion, crosslinking of the T
cell receptor (TCR) induces cell death by delivering an apoptotic signal(s) to
the nucleus along a calcium-dependent pathway. We investigated the reactivity of 
early precursor-containing thymocytes to Ca(2+)-induced signals, and discovered a
breakpoint in their sensitivity to calcium-mediated cell death (CMCD).
CD25+CD8-4- TCR- (triple negative [TN]) thymocytes stimulated with a calcium
ionophore maintain their viability and precursor activity. By contrast, their
immediate progeny, CD25-CD8lo4loTCR alpha beta lo (triple low [TL]) cells react
to calcium elevation by abrogation of precursor activity and apoptotic cell
death. This developmental difference is specific for CMCD, since both CD25+TN and
CD25-TL cells are susceptible to steroid-induced apoptosis. The presence of bcl-2
mRNA correlates directly to the resistance to CMCD-CD25+ TN cells express it and 
CD25-TL cells do not. These experiments show that thymocytes become sensitive to 
Ca(2+)-induced apoptosis as soon as they begin to express molecules that mediate 
thymic selection, and suggest that a concomitant downregulation of bcl-2 may
mediate this phenomenon.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.178.5.1745 
PMCID: PMC2191237
PMID: 8228820  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Exp Parasitol. 1993 Nov;77(3):295-305.

Giardia lamblia: post-translational processing and status of exposed cysteine
residues in TSA 417, a variable surface antigen.

Aley SB(1), Gillin FD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of California San Diego Medical Center
92103-8416.

Giardia lamblia develops and thrives within the harsh and variable environment of
the human small intestine. To survive this environment, Giardia has evolved a
unique family of antigenically variable, extremely cysteine-rich surface
proteins. We have characterized the expression of one of these antigens, TSA 417,
at the gene and protein levels. TSA 417 mRNA and protein were expressed at
constant levels during both logarithmic growth and encystation. On the
trophozoite surface, TSA 417 exists in two forms, an 85-kDa protein and a derived
66-kDa form. Both species have identical amino-terminal sequences that match the 
translated sequence of TSA 417 after removal of a predicted 17 amino acid signal 
peptide. Since TSA 417 is highly cysteine rich (ca. 12 mole%), we asked whether
it was complexed with itself or with other molecules. Although we found no
interchain disulfide bonds, there was substantial intrachain bonding that helped 
retain the gross structure of isolated TSA 417 after partial trypsin digestion.
Because the hydropathy profile of TSA 417 suggested that most of the cysteine and
all 29 of its conserved CXXC motifs are on the cell surface, we investigated
whether TSA 417 might contain some of the free thiols previously shown to be on
the trophozoite surface (Gillin et al., Molecular and Biochemical Parasitology,
13, 1-12, 1984). However, no free thiols were detected, either exposed on native 
TSA 417 or in the unfolded protein. The absence of free thiols and resistance to 
proteolytic digestion suggest that most of the cysteine residues are in
intrachain bridges, probably either disulfide bonds or cysteine-metal complexes. 
This internal crosslinking may help explain the resistance of Giardia to
proteases and other degradative enzymes in the intestinal fluid.

DOI: 10.1006/expr.1993.1087 
PMID: 8224085  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Virology. 1993 Nov;197(1):274-82.

Mutational analysis of the nucleic acid-binding 17 kDa phosphoprotein of potato
leafroll luteovirus identifies an amphipathic alpha-helix as the domain for
protein/protein interactions.

Tacke E(1), Schmitz J, Prüfer D, Rohde W.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Züchtungsforschung, Köln, Germany.

The 17 kDa protein (pr17) of potato leafroll luteovirus is translated from a
subgenomic PLRV RNA by internal translation initiation and binds to
single-stranded nucleic acids (E. Tacke, D. Prüfer, J. Schmitz, and E. Rohde,
1991, J. Gen. Virol. 72, 2035-2038). Chemical crosslinking of in vitro expressed 
pr17 provided evidence for the preferential formation of pr17 homodimers which
were also detected in PLRV-infected potato plants and isolated from potato lines 
expressing the PLRV pr17 transgene. Mutation analysis identified an amphipathic
alpha-helix within the acidic amino-terminus of pr17 which acts as the domain for
protein/protein interactions. Pr17 was predominantly associated with subcellular 
fractions enriched for nuclei, chloroplasts, mitochondria, and membranous
structures. In addition it was shown that pr17 was phosphorylated in planta and
that this modification did not inhibit binding of the protein to nucleic acids.

DOI: 10.1006/viro.1993.1588 
PMID: 8212563  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Yeast. 1993 Nov;9(11):1229-40.

Chromatin structure of the yeast FBP1 gene: transcription-dependent changes in
the regulatory and coding regions.

del Olmo ML(1), Sogo JM, Franco L, Pérez-Ortín JE.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular, Facultades de Ciencias,
Universitat de València, Spain.

We have studied the chromatin structure of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae FBP1
gene, which codes for fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase. A strong, constitutive, DNase 
I, micrococcal nuclease and S1 nuclease hypersensitive site is present close to
the 3' end of the coding region. In the repressed state, positioned nucleosomes
exist around this site, and subtle changes occur in this nucleosomal organization
upon derepression. A DNase I hypersensitive region is located within the promoter
between positions -540 and -400 and its extends towards the gene in the
derepressed state, leading to an alteration of nucleosomal positioning. Psoralen 
crosslinking of chromatin, which is used for the first time to study the mobility
of restriction fragments from an RNA polymerase II gene, revealed that part of
the promoter is nucleosome-free, in accordance with the results of DNase I
digestion. A model is presented that, based on the chromatin structure, puts
forward the hypothesis that the promoter UAS is located between -540 and -340.
Finally, psoralen crosslinking, as well as digestions with micrococcal nuclease
or restriction endonucleases suggests that most if not all of the copies of the
active FBP1 gene are covered by nucleosomes.

DOI: 10.1002/yea.320091110 
PMID: 8109172  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1993 Oct 29;196(2):935-42.

Lupus autoantigen Ku protein binds HIV-1 TAR RNA in vitro.

Kaczmarski W(1), Khan SA.

Author information: 
(1)Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, PA 19104.

The control of HIV-1 gene expression depends upon interaction of Tat with the
trans-activation responsive (TAR) element present at the 5' end of all HIV-1
transcripts. The TAR sequence forms a stable hair-pin structure that binds Tat
and several cellular factors in vitro. In the absence of Tat, TAR acts as a
transcription terminator. Tat in conjunction with a cellular factor(s) acts to
increase the elongation capacity of the transcription complex. Here we report
that Ku protein, the autoantigen in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus,
binds TAR RNA in vitro with high affinity and specificity forming a single
protein-RNA complex. Ku, a heterodimer of Ku72 and Ku86 that non-specifically
binds the ends of DNA fragments, appears to recognize the terminal loop of TAR
RNA. UV-crosslinking showed that both subunits of Ku are in proximity to the RNA.
Further, Ku shows a 5-fold higher affinity for TAR RNA than for the ends of
dsDNA. As Ku is involved in the stimulation of the elongation property of the RNA
polymerase II and activation of several transcription factors, the specific
interaction of Ku with TAR raises intriguing possibilities for its function in
HIV-1 gene expression.

DOI: 10.1006/bbrc.1993.2339 
PMID: 8240370  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Regul Pept. 1993 Oct 20;48(1-2):9-20.

Characterization of type I IGF receptor and IGF-I mRNA expression in cultured
human and bovine glomerular cells.

Ohashi H(1), Rosen KM, Smith FE, Villa-Komaroff L, Nayak RC, King GL.

Author information: 
(1)Joslin Diabetes Center, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA 02215.

Glomerular hypertrophy is reported in several endocrine disorders such as
acromegaly and diabetes mellitus, where abnormalities of growth hormone and
insulin-like growth factor (IGF-I) have been reported. In the present report, we 
have cultured bovine and human glomerular endothelial cells, and bovine
glomerular epithelial and mesangial cells, and characterized the expression of
IGF-I mRNA and its receptor in these cells. High affinity, specific receptors for
IGF-I were identified in all three types of cells by radioreceptor assays.
Receptor number (Ro) derived by Scatchard analysis revealed an unusually high
number of Type I IGF receptors, approx. 1.2 x 10(5) receptors/cell in glomerular 
endothelial cells. Affinity crosslinking studies and immunoprecipitation with
antibodies against the Type I IGF receptor identified the alpha-subunit of the
IGF-I receptor as having a molecular mass of 140 kDa. Biologically, IGF-I was
more potent than insulin or IGF-II in stimulating DNA synthesis in glomerular
endothelial cells. Northern blot analysis showed that glomerular and aortic
endothelial cells expressed IGF-1 mRNA of 1.7 kb. In contrast, renal glomeruli
showed several IGF-1 mRNAs of 7.5, 1.7 and 1.2 kb. Thus, the demonstration of
both a prepondence of Type I IGF receptors coupled with the growth promoting
effects of IGF-I in glomerular endothelial and epithelial cells, as well as the
local production of IGF-I mRNA suggests that IGF-I serves an important role as an
autocrine or paracrine regulator of the growth of renal glomeruli.

DOI: 10.1016/0167-0115(93)90331-2 
PMID: 8265820  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 Oct 1;90(19):9006-10.

RNase E activity is conferred by a single polypeptide: overexpression,
purification, and properties of the ams/rne/hmp1 gene product.

Cormack RS(1), Genereaux JL, Mackie GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Western Ontario, London, Canada.

Ribonuclease E, an enzyme that processes pre-5S rRNA from its precursor, is now
believed to be the major endoribonuclease participating in mRNA turnover in
Escherichia coli. The product of the ams/rne/hmp1 gene, which is required for
RNase E activity, was overexpressed, purified to near homogeneity by
electroelution from an SDS/polyacrylamide gel, and renatured. The purified
polypeptide possesses nucleolytic activity in vitro with a specificity identical 
to that observed for crude RNase E preparations. In addition, both UV
crosslinking and RNA-protein blotting unambiguously showed that the Ams/Rne/Hmp1 
polypeptide has a high affinity for RNA. Our results demonstrate that RNase E
activity is directly attributable to, and is an inherent property of, an
RNA-binding protein, the ams/rne/hmp1 gene product.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.90.19.9006 
PMCID: PMC47490
PMID: 8415644  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


449. J Cell Biol. 1993 Oct;123(1):255-64.

Genetic identification, sequence, and alternative splicing of the Caenorhabditis 
elegans alpha 2(IV) collagen gene.

Sibley MH(1), Johnson JJ, Mello CC, Kramer JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell, Molecular and Structural Biology, Northwestern University 
Medical School, Chicago, Illinois 60611.

The nematode Caenorhabditis elegans has two type IV collagen genes homologous to 
the mammalian alpha 1(IV) and alpha 2(IV) collagen genes. We demonstrate by
transgenic rescue of mutant animals that the genetic locus encoding the C.
elegans alpha 2(IV) collagen gene is let-2 on the X chromosome. The most severe
effect of mutations in let-2 is temperature-sensitive embryonic lethality. The
embryonic lethal phenotype is similar to that seen in animals with mutations in
the alpha 1(IV) collagen gene, emb-9. The sequence of the entire C. elegans alpha
2(IV) collagen gene is presented. Comparisons with mammalian type IV collagen
sequences show high amino acid sequence conservation in the C-terminal NCl domain
and of crosslinking residues (Cys and Lys) in the N-terminal 7S domain. RT-PCR
analysis shows that transcripts of the C. elegans alpha 2(IV) collagen gene are
alternatively spliced. Transcripts contain one of two mutually exclusive exons,
exon 9 or 10. These exons encode very similar products, differing primarily in
the sequence of a 9-10 amino acid Gly-X-Y interruption. The expression of these
alternatively spliced alpha 2(IV) collagen transcripts is developmentally
regulated. In embryos over 90% of the alpha 2(IV) collagen mRNA contains exon 9, 
while larval and adult RNAs contain 80-90% exon 10. This shift in expression of
alternative alpha 2(IV) collagen transcripts suggests that C. elegans embryos may
require a different form of alpha 2(IV) collagen than do larvae and adults.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.123.1.255 
PMCID: PMC2119826
PMID: 7691828  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Mutat Res. 1993 Oct;289(2):171-80.

Induction and removal of interstrand crosslinks in the ribosomal RNA genes of
lymphoblastoid cell lines from patients with Fanconi anemia.

Rey JP(1), Scott R, Müller H.

Author information: 
(1)Department Research, University Hospital, Basel, Switzerland.

The repair of interstrand crosslinks has been investigated in Fanconi anemia (FA)
and normal cells as there is evidence suggesting that FA patients have a defect
in DNA repair. Lymphoblasts were treated with the crosslinking agent mitomycin C 
(MMC) and the removal of the induced DNA lesions investigated at the level of the
actively transcribed ribosomal RNA (rRNA) genes. MMC-induced crosslinks appeared 
to be a rather stable lesion in the rRNA genes for all cell lines studied.
Variable repair efficiencies were found between the different cells lines but
they could not be used to distinguish normal cells from FA cells. Therefore, we
propose that the specific sensitivity of FA cells towards MMC cannot be directly 
correlated with a deficient repair in interstrand crosslinks and that probably
the complexity of the repair process is greater than previously described.

DOI: 10.1016/0027-5107(93)90067-p 
PMID: 7690885  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 Jul 1;90(13):6203-7.

Histone octamer dissociation is not required for transcript elongation through
arrays of nucleosome cores by phage T7 RNA polymerase in vitro.

O'Neill TE(1), Smith JG, Bradbury EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, School of Medicine, University of
California, Davis 95616.

We have examined whether dissociation of the histone octamer is required for
elongation of RNA transcripts through arrays of nucleosome cores in vitro.
Control or dimethyl suberimidate-crosslinked histone octamers were reconstituted 
onto supercoiled, closed circular pT207-18 DNA, which contains tandemly repeated 
207-base-pair (bp) 5S rDNA nucleosome positioning sequences inserted between the 
T7 and SP6 transcription promoters of pGEM-3Z. Double label transcription
experiments showed that there was little or no effect of extensive crosslinking
of the histone octamers on transcription initiation and elongation by T7 RNA
polymerase in vitro. Continuous regularly spaced linear arrays of either
crosslinked or control nucleosome cores were obtained by digesting reconstituted 
nucleosomal pT207-18 templates with Dra I, a site that is protected from
digestion by the presence of positioned nucleosome cores in the 207-pb sequence. 
After in vitro transcription with T7 RNA polymerase, an RNA ladder with
207-nucleotide spacing was obtained from templates reconstituted both with
crosslinked and with control histone octamers, demonstrating clearly that neither
partial nor complete dissociation of the histone octamer is essential for
transcription elongation through arrays of nucleosome cores in vitro.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.90.13.6203 
PMCID: PMC46896
PMID: 8327500  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Rapid Commun Mass Spectrom. 1993 Jun;7(6):496-501.

Direct observation of UV-crosslinked protein-nucleic acid complexes by
matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization mass spectrometry.

Jensen ON(1), Barofsky DF, Young MC, von Hippel PH, Swenson S, Seifried SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Biophysics, Oregon State University, Corvallis
97331-7305.

Interactions between proteins and nucleic acids are important in the fundamental 
cellular processes that drive replication, recombination, dynamic alteration and 
repair of DNA, transcription and processing of RNA, synthesis of proteins, and
regulation of enzyme activities. As part of an effort to develop a general,
sensitive mass spectrometric strategy for the characterization of protein-nucleic
acid interactions, we have used matrix-assisted laser desorption-ionization
(MALDI) time-of-flight mass spectrometry to analyze protein-nucleic acid
complexes that have been covalently crosslinked by ultraviolet (UV) light. In
general, the application of MALDI mass spectrometric techniques to studies of
UV-induced crosslinking of nucleoprotein complexes is demonstrated to be
feasible. Specifically, MALDI mass analysis was used to determine the molecular
weights of the phage T4 gene 32 protein (gp32) crosslinked to the oligonucleotide
(dT)20, and the Escherichia coli transcription termination factor rho,
photoaffinity labeled with 4-thio-uridine-diphosphate (4sUDP). The covalent
gp32:(dT)20 complex is readily detected at a concentration of 1-2 microM in 1
microL of an unpurified solution of reactants that has been exposed to a single, 
266 nm UV laser pulse. Mass spectrometric molecular weight determinations of the 
covalent rho:4sUDP complex add directness and specificity to the ATPase
inactivation assay normally used to monitor the formation of 4sUDP photoaffinity 
labeled rho. It is found that successful MALDI mass spectrometry of
protein-nucleic acid complexes is as critically dependent on the choice of
solvents and additives as it is on the primary matrix compound.

DOI: 10.1002/rcm.1290070619 
PMID: 8329769  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1993 May 28;193(1):453-9.

Binding activity of the human transcription factor TFIID.

Icard-Liepkalns C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire de la Neurotransmission, C.N.R.S.,
Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

In order to investigate the conformational state of the human TFIID, we studied
the structure of the TATA-box binding protein (TBP) which is the DNA-binding
subunit of the transcription factor TFIID required for transcriptional initiation
by RNA polymerase II. We showed that TBP was able to form dimers and tetramers by
chemical crosslinking, subunit exchange, ultracentrifugation and gel shift
experiment. These findings indicate that the TBP homodimers could be the inactive
binding form of TFIID and therefore could explain the lack of Gal4-activated
transcriptional activity of the E. coli-expressed human TBP.

DOI: 10.1006/bbrc.1993.1645 
PMID: 8503934  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1993 May 28;1173(2):147-54.

Human immunodeficiency virus type-1 reverse transcriptase copies very short
templates: kinetic and crosslinking analysis.

Andreola ML(1), Dufour E, Tarrago-Litvak L, Jamkovoy VI, Levina AS, Barr PJ,
Litvak S, Nevinsky GA.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biochimie Cellulaire du CNRS, Bordeaux, France.

We describe in this article some properties concerning the cDNA elongation
activity of human immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV-1) reverse transcriptase
(RT). The kinetic parameters of the polymerization reaction catalyzed by HIV-1
RT, using short templates, were studied. Values of Km and Vmax were measured as a
function of the oligoadenylate template length: the logarithm of Km increased
linearly, with an incremental factor of 2.2, when the template length differs by 
one nucleotide. Using short templates, olig(A)n (n = 7-14) and primers shorter or
longer than the template, HIV-1 reverse transcriptase was able to synthesize
polymer products longer than 200 nucleotides. We showed that an oligonucleotide
as short as (pA)3 was long enough to serve as template for cDNA synthesis by RT. 
In the binding of RT to template of different lengths (5 to 14 nucleotides long),
two constants were determined differing in each case by a factor of about 10. The
three recombinant forms of HIV-1 RT (p66/p51, p66/p66 and p51/p51) were
crosslinked to a short template, (pA)14, in the presence of
cis-aquahydroxydiamminoplatinum. The efficiency of crosslink of [32P](pA)14
template with each of the subunits of RT correlated well with the affinity of
this template to the different forms of RT. In the case of p66/p51, the crosslink
occurred mainly with the p66 subunit. These results confirm the important
catalytic role of the p66 subunit in the heterodimeric human retroviral
polymerase.

DOI: 10.1016/0167-4781(93)90175-d 
PMID: 7684930  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Nucleic Acids Res. 1993 May 25;21(10):2331-8.

Chromatin structures and transcription of rDNA in yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Dammann R(1), Lucchini R, Koller T, Sogo JM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biology, ETH-Hönggerberg, Zürich, Switzerland.

The chromatin structure of yeast ribosomal DNA was analyzed in vivo by
crosslinking intact cells with psoralen. We found that in exponentially growing
cultures the regions coding for the 35S rRNA precursor fall into two distinct
classes. One class was highly accessible to psoralen and associated with nascent 
RNAs, characteristic for transcriptionally active rRNA genes devoid of
nucleosomes, whereas the other class showed a crosslinking pattern
indistinguishable from that of bulk chromatin and was interpreted to represent
the inactive rRNA gene copies. By crosslinking the same strain growing in complex
or minimal medium, we have shown that yeast cells can modulate the proportion of 
active (non-nucleosomal) and inactive (nucleosomal) rRNA gene copies in response 
to variations in environmental conditions which suggests that yeast can regulate 
rRNA synthesis by varying the number of active gene copies, in contrast to the
vertebrate cells studied so far. Whereas intergenic spacers flanking inactive
rRNA gene copies are packaged in a regular nucleosomal array, spacers flanking
active genes show an unusual crosslinking pattern suggesting a complex
interaction of regulatory factors and histones with DNA.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/21.10.2331 
PMCID: PMC309528
PMID: 8506130  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Nucleic Acids Res. 1993 May 11;21(9):2057-63.

The nucleolar transcription activator UBF relieves Ku antigen-mediated repression
of mouse ribosomal gene transcription.

Kuhn A(1), Stefanovsky V, Grummt I.

Author information: 
(1)German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg.

Previously we have shown that the RNA polymerase I (Pol I)-specific transcription
factor UBF stimulates transcription by both facilitating transcription complex
formation and by relieving repression exerted by a negative-acting factor which
competes for binding of the murine factor TIF-IB to the ribosomal gene promoter
(1). We have purified and functionally characterized this repressor protein from 
Ehrlich ascites cells. The final preparation contained two polypeptides with
molecular masses of 75 and 90 kDa, respectively. Both polypeptides interact with 
the rDNA promoter as revealed by UV-crosslinking experiments. The specificity of 
binding to the ribosomal gene promoter was demonstrated in an electrophoretic
mobility shift assay and by DNase footprinting. The biochemical properties of
this negative-acting factor closely resemble those of the Ku antigen, a human
nuclear DNA-binding heterodimer which is the target of autoantibodies in several 
autoimmune diseases. Anti-Ku antibodies precipitate the repressor activity and
overcome transcription inhibition. The data demonstrate that regulation of Pol I 
gene transcription may involve an antirepression mechanism as already documented 
for Pol II genes and suggest that Ku protein may be causally involved in
repressor-mediated down regulation of rRNA synthesis.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/21.9.2057 
PMCID: PMC309465
PMID: 8502546  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Nucleic Acids Res. 1993 May 11;21(9):2073-9.

Synthesis and characterization of a new photocrosslinking CTP analog and its use 
in photoaffinity labeling E. coli and T7 RNA polymerases.

Hanna MM(1), Zhang Y, Reidling JC, Thomas MJ, Jou J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Botany and Microbiology, University of Oklahoma, Norman 73019.

A new photocrosslinking CTP analog that functioned as a substrate during
transcription was synthesized and used to photoaffinity label E. coli and
bacteriophage T7 RNA polymerases. This analog, 5-((4-azidophenacyl)thio)
cytidine-5'-triphosphate (5-APAS-CTP) contains an aryl azide group approximately 
10 A from the nucleotide base and specifically replaced CTP during synthesis of
RNA by both polymerases. Analog was placed at the 3' end or internally within
RNA. Both polymerases inefficiently incorporated two 5-APAS-CMP molecules
sequentially, as was found for the related 5-APAS-UMP. Analog was placed at the
3' end of RNA in transcription complexes paused at the site of Q-modification of 
E. coli RNA polymerase, downstream of the lambda PR' promoter (+16), a pause that
requires specific DNA sequences but no apparent RNA hairpin. Crosslinking was
examined in the presence and absence of the NusA protein, which enhances the
transcriptional pause at this site and is required for Q modification of the
polymerase. Crosslinking of the 3' end of the RNA to NusA was not observed,
consistent with our earlier results involving a NusA-enhanced pause site
downstream from an RNA hairpin.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/21.9.2073 
PMCID: PMC309467
PMID: 7684833  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Science. 1993 Apr 23;260(5107):504-8.

Movement of the guide sequence during RNA catalysis by a group I ribozyme.

Wang JF(1), Downs WD, Cech TR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry,
University of Colorado, Boulder 80309.

Ribozymes derived from the self-splicing pre-ribosomal RNA of Tetrahymena act as 
sequence-specific endonucleases. The reaction involves binding an RNA or DNA
substrate by base pairing to the internal guide sequence (IGS) to form helix P1. 
Site-specific photo-crosslinking localized the 5' end of the IGS in helix P1 to
the vicinity of conserved bases between helices P4 and P5, supporting a major
feature of the Michel-Westhof three-dimensional structure model. The crosslinked 
ribozyme retained catalytic activity. When not base-paired, the IGS was still
specifically crosslinked, but the major site was 37 A distant from the reactive
site in the experimentally supported three-dimensional model. The data indicate
that a substantial induced-fit conformational change accompanies P1 formation,
and they provide a physical basis for understanding the transport of
oligonucleotides to the catalytic core of the ribozyme. The ability of RNA to
orchestrate large-scale conformational changes may help explain why the ribosome 
and the spliceosome are RNA-based machines.

DOI: 10.1126/science.7682726 
PMID: 7682726  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Kidney Int. 1993 Apr;43(4):853-64.

Nonenzymatic glycation of mesangial matrix and prolonged exposure of mesangial
matrix to elevated glucose reduces collagen synthesis and proteoglycan charge.

Silbiger S(1), Crowley S, Shan Z, Brownlee M, Satriano J, Schlondorff D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York.

Expansion of the mesangial matrix in diabetes occurs after prolonged exposure to 
the diabetic milieu. To mimic the long-term hyperglycemia of diabetes mellitus we
developed tissue culture systems that might approximate the chronic state. This
was accomplished in two ways: (1) by growing mesangial cells on extracellular
matrix glycated and crosslinked in vitro and (2) by continuously growing cells on
their own matrix on filters in elevated glucose medium (500 mg/dl) for up to
eight weeks without passage. Synthesis of collagen and proteoglycans was
evaluated in cells grown under these conditions. In both these situations,
3H-proline incorporation into collagenase sensitive protein and 35S incorporation
into sulfated proteins were reduced compared to control cultures. Despite
reduction in 35S incorporation into proteoglycans in the high glucose cultures,
total glycosaminoglycan content was unchanged. However, proteoglycans generated
by mesangial cells grown in elevated glucose media were of a lower negative
charge than controls. In mesangial cells continuously grown on filters, the
levels of messenger RNA for collagen types I and IV, biglycan and TGF-beta were
not different in cells grown at elevated or standard glucose concentrations for
two and four weeks. We conclude that crosslinking of mesangial matrix or
continuous culture of cells for prolonged periods of time in high glucose medium,
which may also crosslink matrix, suppresses collagen synthesis and reduces the
negative charges on matrix proteoglycans without altering mRNA levels.

DOI: 10.1038/ki.1993.120 
PMID: 8479121  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


460. J Gen Virol. 1993 Apr;74 ( Pt 4):715-23.

The GGTCA palindrome and cognate cellular factors in trans-regulation of human
immunodeficiency virus long terminal repeat by herpes simplex virus.

Feng CP(1), Kulka M, Aurelian L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, University of
Maryland, School of Medicine, Baltimore 21201.

Molecular interactions between herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) and human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) were investigated in the promonocytic cell line
U937. HSV-1-mediated activation was observed in transient expression assays with 
hybrid constructions containing the HIV long terminal repeat (LTR)-directed
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase gene. Comparison of constructions that differ
in the GGTCA palindrome located within the negative regulatory region of the LTR 
revealed four- to eightfold lower activation levels for the wild-type as compared
to the mutant sequence. Three protein species, 37K, 59K/64K and 75K, that bind to
the wild-type GGTCA palindrome were resolved in nuclear extracts of uninfected
U937 cells by gel retardation and u.v.-crosslinking experiments. The 37K protein 
did not bind to the mutant palindrome sequence. However, a distinct 120K protein 
was detected. The 37K and 59K/64K binding proteins were not resolved in similar
experiments performed with nuclear extracts from HSV-1-infected U937 cells but
there was a novel p50 species that binds only to the wild-type palindrome
sequence. These findings raise the possibility that interaction of these proteins
at the GGTCA palindrome is involved in HSV-1-mediated regulation of the HIV LTR
in U937 cells.

DOI: 10.1099/0022-1317-74-4-715 
PMID: 8385697  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


461. EMBO J. 1993 Mar;12(3):1067-75.

Stably maintained microdomain of localized unrestrained supercoiling at a
Drosophila heat shock gene locus.

Jupe ER(1), Sinden RR, Cartwright IL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of
Cincinnati College of Medicine, OH 45267-0524.

A psoralen crosslinking assay was utilized to detect localized, unrestrained DNA 
supercoiling (torsional tension) in vivo in Drosophila chromosomal regions
subject to differential transcriptional activity. By comparing rates of
crosslinking in intact cells with those in cells where potential tension in
chromosomal domains was relaxed by DNA strand nicking, the contribution to
psoralen accessibility caused by altered DNA-protein interactions (e.g.
nucleosomal perturbations) was distinguished from that due to the presence of
unrestrained supercoiling in a region of interest. The heat shock protein 70
(hsp70) genes were wound with a significant level of superhelical tension that
remained virtually unaltered whether or not the genes were transcriptionally
activated by thermal elevation. Constitutively expressed 18S ribosomal RNA genes 
also exhibited unrestrained superhelical tension at a level comparable with that 
across hsp70. In contrast, flanking regions downstream of each of the divergent
hsp70 genes at locus 87A7 exhibited substantially less tension. Thus the results 
point to the existence of stable, torsionally stressed topological domains within
eukaryotic chromosomal DNA, suggesting that the relaxing action of topoisomerases
is not ubiquitous throughout the nucleus but, in fact, is likely to be tightly
regulated.


PMCID: PMC413308
PMID: 8458324  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1993 Feb 15;190(3):747-53.

Characterization of the factor E1BF from a rat hepatoma that modulates ribosomal 
RNA gene transcription and its relationship to the human Ku autoantigen.

Hoff CM(1), Jacob ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Biology, Chicago Medical School, IL
60064.

We have purified the DNA binding protein E1BF (Enhancer 1 Binding Factor) from
the nuclei of Morris hepatoma 3924A. This protein, which consists of two
polypeptides of 72 kDa and 85 kDa, binds to several DNA sequences involved in the
regulation of rDNA transcription. UV-crosslinking studies show that interaction
of the protein with DNA is primarily through the 72 kDa polypeptide. Purified
E1BF can also modulate pol I-directed transcription in a cell-free systems
derived from rat and mouse. E1BF is related to the human autoantigen Ku as
demonstrated by immunological cross-reactivity with monoclonal antibodies
directed against Ku p70 in Western blot and gel mobility shift assays.

DOI: 10.1006/bbrc.1993.1112 
PMID: 8439324  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 Jan 15;90(2):517-21.

Identification of an RNA binding site for human thymidylate synthase.

Chu E(1), Voeller D, Koeller DM, Drake JC, Takimoto CH, Maley GF, Maley F,
Allegra CJ.

Author information: 
(1)National Cancer Institute-Navy Medical Oncology Branch, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892.

Previous studies from this laboratory have shown that human TS mRNA translation
is regulated by its protein product in a negative autoregulatory manner. In this 
paper, we identify an RNA binding site for TS protein located within the first
188 nt of TS RNA. A 36-nt RNA sequence contained within this 188-nt fragment,
corresponding to nt 75-110 and including the translational initiation site, binds
TS protein with an affinity similar to that of both the full-length and the
188-nt TS RNA sequences. Variant RNAs with either a deletion or a mutation at the
translational initiation region are unable to compete for TS protein binding. UV 
crosslinking studies reveal that an RNA fragment of approximately 36 nt is
protected from RNase T1 digestion by TS protein binding. A second TS
protein-binding site is localized within the protein-coding region corresponding 
to nt 434-634. These findings demonstrate a specific interaction between human TS
protein and its TS RNA and identify an RNA binding site that includes the
translational initiation site.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.90.2.517 
PMCID: PMC45694
PMID: 8421684  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Methods Mol Biol. 1993;18:449-51. doi: 10.1385/0-89603-245-0:449.

Filter hybridization.

Murphy D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Neuropeptide Laboratory, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, National
University of Singapore, Republic of Singapore.

This chapter describes a standard method for the hybridization of labeled DNA
probes to nucleic acids bound to a nylon matrix. Filters bearing bound nucleic
acids produced by Northern blotting of RNA (Chapter 39), Southern blotting of DNA
(Chapter 37), and slot blotting of DNA (Chapters 35) or RNA (Chapter 40) are
hybridized to labeled probes using the method described below. The advantages of 
this method are, first, that the use of a high concentration of SDS in the
hybridization buffer ensures a low background level of nonspecific probe
adherence to the membrane and, second, an extended period of filter
prehybridization is not required. The inclusion of a large amount of SDS does,
however, necessitate that the nucleic acids are covalently bonded to the matrix
by UV light crosslinking. The inclusion of formamide (15% [v/v]) is also
recommended in order to reduce the viscosity of the hybridization buffer.
Formamide also has the effect of reducing the temperature of the hybridization
reaction.

DOI: 10.1385/0-89603-245-0:449 
PMID: 21390694  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 Jan 1;90(1):222-6.

Apolipoprotein B mRNA editing is associated with UV crosslinking of proteins to
the editing site.

Navaratnam N(1), Shah R, Patel D, Fay V, Scott J.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Molecular Medicine Group, Royal Postgraduate Medical 
School, London, United Kingdom.

Apolipoprotein (apo) B100 mRNA undergoes editing of C-6666 to a U residue, which 
generates a stop-translation codon and defines the carboxyl terminus of apoB48.
To aid purification of the editing enzyme we have undertaken UV crosslinking of a
32P-labeled substrate for apoB mRNA editing in vitro to proteins in an enterocyte
editing extract. Proteins of 60 (p60) and 43 (p43) kDa, prominent among
crosslinking bands, were competed for by unlabeled substrate, but not by
nonspecific RNA, and did not crosslink to antisense RNA. Editing in vitro and UV 
crosslinking were inhibited by NaCl and vanadyl ribonucleoside complexes and by
chemical modification of sulfhydryl, imidazolium, and guanidinium groups on the
protein. The editing activity copurified predominantly with p60. To define the
binding site for p60 on the substrate RNA, a series of scanning and point mutant 
RNAs, previously used to define nucleotides 6671-6681 as essential for editing,
were used in competition studies with wild-type substrate. Results demonstrated
that p60 binding is centered on nucleotides 6671-6674. We suggest that p60
contains the RNA-recognition component of the apoB mRNA-editing enzyme.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.90.1.222 
PMCID: PMC45632
PMID: 8419928  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Cell Mol Biol Res. 1993;39(4):393-9.

Photocrosslinking analysis of protein-RNA interactions in E. coli transcription
complexes.

Hanna MM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Botany-Microbiology, University of Oklahoma, Norman 73019.

Regulation of transcription involves numerous specific protein-nucleic acid
interactions. We have utilized photochemical crosslinking to identify
interactions between Escherichia coli transcription proteins and the nascent RNA 
in several transcription complexes, including initiation, elongation, and
antitermination complexes. We have developed new nucleotide analogs, 5-APAS-UTP
and 5-APAS-CTP, which are tagged with photocrosslinking groups on base positions 
that do not interfere with normal Watson-Crick base-pairing. These analogs are
incorporated at internal positions in RNA by E. coli RNA polymerase without
disrupting RNA secondary structures. We have also used 8-azido-ATP, which can be 
incorporated uniquely into the 3' end of the RNA, to analyze interactions at the 
enzyme active site. Interactions between the RNA and the polymerase subunits, and
the effect of various transcription factors, including NusA, NusB, NusE, and
NusG, have been examined in complexes containing RNAs from 4 to approximately 80 
nucleotides. At almost every RNA position examined, both the beta and beta'
subunits are contacted, but never the alpha subunit or NusA. An effect of NusA on
the core labeling has been observed in some complexes, however. Sigma is
contacted by nucleotides within three nucleotides of the +1 position on the DNA.


PMID: 7508793  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


467. J Mol Biol. 1992 Dec 20;228(4):1063-77.

Topography of transcription factor complexes on the Saccharomyces cerevisiae 5 S 
RNA gene.

Braun BR(1), Bartholomew B, Kassavetis GA, Geiduschek EP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla
92093-0634.

Locations of component proteins of yeast RNA polymerase III transcription factors
(TFIII) A, C and B on a 5 S rRNA gene have been determined by site-specific
DNA-protein photo-crosslinking. Comparison with a previously analyzed tRNA gene
shows that similar nucleoprotein structures assemble on these two genes despite
their differently located internal promoter elements. A principal signature of
this homology is the placement of the 95 kDA subunit of TFIIIC, which associates 
with the box A promoter element of the tRNA gene. On the 5 S rRNA gene, the 95
kDa subunit occupies the same space in the absence of a box A sequence, and
despite the presence of a box A-like sequence 30 base-pairs further downstream. A
90 kDa component that was not previously recognized as an integral part of TFIIIC
has been specifically located at the 3' end of the 5 S rRNA gene.

DOI: 10.1016/0022-2836(92)90315-b 
PMID: 1474578  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


468. J Invest Dermatol. 1992 Dec;99(6):864-9.

Characterization of a partial cDNA for lysyl hydroxylase from human skin
fibroblasts; lysyl hydroxylase mRNAs are regulated differently by minoxidil
derivatives and hydralazine.

Yeowell HN(1), Ha V, Walker LC, Murad S, Pinnell SR.

Author information: 
(1)Duke University Medical Center, Division of Dermatology, Durham, NC 27710.

Lysyl hydroxylase (LH) is an essential enzyme in collagen biosynthesis that
catalyzes the formation of hydroxylysine required for intermolecular crosslinking
of collagen. We have isolated a partial (2.2-kb) cDNA for LH from human skin
fibroblasts using PCR. DNA sequencing revealed 72% homology of the human coding
sequence with the chick LH sequence at the nucleotide level and 76% homology
predicted at the amino acid level. The LH cDNA hybridized strongly with two mRNA 
species of 2.4 and 3.4 kb on Northern blots of normal fibroblast RNA.
Administration of minoxidil decreased both mRNA species without affecting levels 
of the mRNAs for the beta subunit of prolyl 4-hydroxylase (PH) or alpha 1(I)
collagen. Two derivatives of minoxidil (3' hydroxyminoxidil and 4'
hydroxyminoxidil) produced similar decreases in LH mRNAs. In contrast hydralazine
increased the mRNAs for LH in parallel with its previously reported effect on the
mRNA for the beta subunit of PH. This effect is accompanied by virtual
elimination of the alpha 1(I) collagen mRNAs. These results on the action of
minoxidil and hydralazine at the pretranslational level correlate well with their
previously reported effect on enzyme activity and collagen biosynthesis and
indicate that changes in steady-state mRNA levels can account directly for
changes at the protein level. Moreover, the unique action of minoxidil in
specifically decreasing LH mRNAs contrasts with the less specific stimulatory
effects of hydralazine and suggests that these pharmaceuticals are regulating
expression of LH at a pretranslational level by different mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1111/1523-1747.ep12614840 
PMID: 1335016  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1992 Nov 30;189(1):424-9.

Molecular cloning of the mouse S-adenosylmethionine decarboxylase cDNA: specific 
protein binding to the conserved region of the mRNA 5'-untranslated region.

Waris T(1), Ihalainen R, Keränen MR, Pajunen A.

Author information: 
(1)Biocenter, University of Oulu, Finland.

The nucleotide sequence of a cDNA encoding the proenzyme of mouse
S-adenosylmethionine decarboxylase (AdoMetDC) including 257 nucleotides of the 5'
untranslated region has been determined. Comparison of the nucleotide sequence of
the mouse 5' untranslated region with those of other mammals shows it to be
highly conserved. The 52 nucleotides upstream from the translation initiation
codon are identical in human, rat, bovine and mouse. The polyamines, spermidine
and spermine, have been shown to inhibit AdoMetDC mRNA translation. An RNA gel
retardation assay demonstrated that a cytoplasmic extract from mouse brain forms 
an RNA-protein complex with the completely conserved 5' untranslated sequence and
that the complex formation is highly dependent on the presence of spermine.
Crosslinking by UV irradiation shows that the complex contains a 39-kDa protein
interacting with the 5' untranslated sequence. These data demonstrate
spermine-dependent specific protein binding to a highly conserved 5' untranslated
region of an mRNA translationally regulated by polyamines.

DOI: 10.1016/0006-291x(92)91575-b 
PMID: 1449493  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Gene. 1992 Nov 16;121(2):313-20.

Expression of the human ADH2 gene: an unusual Sp1-binding site in the promoter of
a gene expressed at high levels in liver.

Brown CJ(1), Baltz KA, Edenberg HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis 46202-5122.

The sequence 5'-GTGGGTGTGGC (G3T) is important for the efficient initiation of
transcription from the human ADH2 promoter. We show here that the purified
transcription factor Sp1 binds with high affinity to the G3T site of ADH2
(encoding beta beta-alcohol dehydrogenase), even though the G3T sequence does not
contain the canonical Sp1-binding site, GGGCGG. Proteins from mouse liver nuclei 
and purified Sp1 both footprint the same sequence of the ADH2 promoter with
similar patterns. UV crosslinking demonstrates that the major G3T-binding protein
in the liver extract is similar in size to Sp1. Mouse liver nuclear extract
resembles purified Sp1 in its relative binding affinity to a series of
oligodeoxyribonucleotides containing either the Sp1-binding site or variants of
the G3T sequence. These data indicate that the G3T sequence can interact with Sp1
and that Sp1 may be important in the expression of ADH2. The G3T sequence from
the closely related ADH3 gene (encoding gamma gamma-alcohol dehydrogenase)
differs from that of ADH2 in the first two nucleotides; it binds both the liver
protein and purified Sp1 with lower affinity. This might explain why ADH3 is
expressed at lower levels than ADH2 in the liver.

DOI: 10.1016/0378-1119(92)90136-d 
PMID: 1446829  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Nucleic Acids Res. 1992 Nov 11;20(21):5593-600.

Binding of Xenopus oocyte masking proteins to mRNA sequences.

Marello K(1), LaRovere J, Sommerville J.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological and Medical Sciences, University of St Andrews, Fife, UK.

It has been shown previously that maternal mRNA, synthesized and stored in
growing oocytes, is stabilized and blocked from translation through various
mechanisms including restricted polyadenylation and the binding of proteins to 3'
regulatory elements. In addition to binding sequence-specific proteins, the bulk 
of stored mRNA is packaged with a set of 'masking' proteins, the most abundant of
which are the phosphoproteins pp56 and pp60. In this report these proteins are
shown to be bound to heterogeneous mRNA sequences and not to the 3' poly(A)
tract. Crosslinking studies demonstrate that all of the pp56/60 present makes
direct contact with the RNA. In vitro binding studies confirm that pp56/60
interact with single-stranded RNA of heterogeneous sequence, such as occurring in
the maternal mRNA encoding cyclin B1. However, binding is equally effective to
capped and polyadenylated cyclin mRNA, to truncated mRNA lacking 5' and 3'
non-coding regions and even to the antisense sequence. Lengths of 70-80
nucleotides are protected from ribonuclease digestion after protein binding.
Although no extended binding motif could be detected, binding does appear to have
some specificity in that it is not competed out by 100-fold excess of
double-stranded RNA, transfer RNA, poly(A) and various other homopolymers and
heteropolymers. The sequence which competes most efficiently is the mixed
polypyrimidine, poly(C,U). Crosslinking of RNA-protein complexes, followed by
ribonuclease digestion, suggests that the arrangement of proteins on RNA is as
dimers. Dimerization appears to be stabilized by phosphorylation of pp56/60.
These results are discussed in terms of the known structures of pp56/60.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/20.21.5593 
PMCID: PMC334391
PMID: 1454524  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Nucleic Acids Res. 1992 Oct 25;20(20):5375-82.

A new interaction between the mouse 5' external transcribed spacer of pre-rRNA
and U3 snRNA detected by psoralen crosslinking.

Tyc K(1), Steitz JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06536-0812.

The first cleavage in mammalian pre-rRNA processing occurs within the 5' external
transcribed spacer (ETS). We have recently shown that the U3 snRNP is required
for this cleavage reaction, binds to the rRNA precursor, and remains complexed
with the downstream processing product after the reaction has been completed (1).
Using psoralen crosslinking in mouse cell extract we have detected a new
interaction between U3 RNA and the mouse ETS processing substrate and its
processed product. The crosslinked sites on both U3 and ETS RNAs have been mapped
by RNase H cleavage and primer extension analyses. The crosslinked sites in U3
RNA map to C5, U6, and U8. U8 lies within and C5 and U6 are adjacent to an
evolutionarily conserved U3 sequence termed box A'. In the ETS the crosslinked
sites are U1012 and U1013, 362 nucleotides downstream from the processing site.
Although the crosslinked site is dispensable for the primary processing reaction 
in vitro, a short conserved sequence just 3' to the cleavage site (nucleotides
650-668) is absolutely required for crosslink formation. We conclude that the
interaction between U3 RNA and the 5' ETS detected by psoralen crosslinking may
play a role in subsequent step(s) of pre-rRNA processing.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/20.20.5375 
PMCID: PMC334344
PMID: 1437554  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Nucleic Acids Res. 1992 Sep 11;20(17):4481-9.

Characterization and purification of Adh distal promoter factor 2, Adf-2, a
cell-specific and promoter-specific repressor in Drosophila.

Benyajati C(1), Ewel A, McKeon J, Chovav M, Juan E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Rochester, NY 14627.

Chromatin footprinting in Drosophila tissue culture cells has detected the
binding of a non-histone protein at +8 of the distal Adh RNA start site, on a
10-bp direct repeat motif abutting a nucleosome positioned over the inactive Adh 
distal promoter. Alternatively the active promoter is bound by a transcription
initiation complex. We have characterized and purified a protein Adf-2 that binds
specifically to this direct repeat motif 5'TCTCAGTGCA3', present at +8 and -202
of the distal RNA start site. DNase I footprinting, methylation interference, and
UV-crosslinking analyses showed that both direct repeats interact in vitro with a
nuclear protein of approximately 120 kilodaltons (kDa). We purified Adf-2 through
multiple rounds of sequence-specific DNA affinity chromatography. Southwestern
analysis showed that the purified 120 KDa polypeptide binds the Adf-2 motif
efficiently as a monomer or homomultimer. In vivo titrations of Adf-2 activity
with the Adf-2 motif by transient co-transfection competitions in different
Drosophila cell lines suggested that Adf-2 is a cell-specific repressor. Adf-2
has been detected ubiquitously in vitro, but is functional in vivo as a
sequence-specific DNA binding protein and repressor only in the cells that have
the inactive distal promoter. We discuss the possibility that an activation
process is required for Adf-2 protein to bind DNA and function in vivo.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/20.17.4481 
PMCID: PMC334175
PMID: 1408750  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1992 Aug 1;296(2):402-9.

Tissue-specific binding of testis nuclear proteins to a sequence element within
the promoter of the testis-specific histone H1t gene.

Grimes SR(1), Wolfe SA, Koppel DA.

Author information: 
(1)Research Service (151), Veterans Administration Medical Center, Shreveport,
Louisiana 71101-4295.

The rat histone H1t gene is transcribed only in testis germinal cells. This
testis-specific chromosomal protein is first synthesized during spermatogenesis
in pachytene spermatocytes and the entire complement of testis histones is
replaced during the midspermatid stage of spermiogenesis by positively charged
transition nuclear proteins TP1 and TP2. Mobility shift assays conducted using
crude nuclear protein extracts from different tissues and an 18-bp DNA sequence
element within the H1t promoter as a probe reveal binding only with nuclear
proteins from testis. The binding is specifically competed with an excess of the 
same unlabeled DNA fragment but not with heterologous competitors. A larger
oligonucleotide corresponding to the same sequence element plus 18 bp of the
adjacent downstream H1/CCAAT element binds nuclear proteins from all tissues
tested, but a unique low mobility band is formed only with testis extracts.
Protein-DNA crosslinking experiments reveal that two major polypeptides with
molecular weights of approximately 13 and 30 kDa bind to the 18-bp H1t promoter
sequence element. This strong correlation between the tissue where the H1t gene
is transcribed and the presence of testis-specific nuclear proteins that bind to 
a sequence element within the testis histone H1t promoter supports the
possibility that these DNA-binding proteins may participate in formation of an
active transcription initiation complex with the testis H1t promoter.

DOI: 10.1016/0003-9861(92)90590-s 
PMID: 1632632  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1992 Jul 15;186(1):574-9.

On the mechanisms of Ku protein binding to DNA.

Zhang WW(1), Yaneva M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030.

The in vitro DNA-binding activity of Ku protein, a heterodimer of 70 and 86 kDa
subunits, was studied using affinity-purified protein. Ku protein bound to
different DNA probes and displayed a multiple-band pattern in band mobility shift
assays. The protein-DNA complex formation was effectively blocked by different
DNA competitors, indicating a non-sequence specific binding of Ku protein to DNA;
no preference of binding of Ku protein to regulatory sequences derived from U1
snRNA, U6 snRNA or nucleolar protein p120 genes was observed. The number and size
of the Ku protein-DNA complexes increased with increasing of the protein
concentration and the size of DNA probe, suggesting that the protein accumulates 
on the DNA fragment until saturation of the binding sites. In UV-crosslinking
experiments, the binding of Ku protein to DNA was shown to start with the 70 kDa 
subunit contacting free DNA ends.

DOI: 10.1016/s0006-291x(05)80847-2 
PMID: 1632793  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


476. J Mol Biol. 1992 Jun 5;225(3):651-60.

kfrA gene of broad host range plasmid RK2 encodes a novel DNA-binding protein.

Jagura-Burdzy G(1), Thomas CM.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Birmingham, U.K.

The korABF operon of broad host range IncP plasmid RK2 encodes proteins that
coordinate expression of many other operons and that aid plasmid stability by
providing at least part of a partitioning apparatus. The kfrA gene lies
downstream from this operon and its transcription is repressed by all except one 
of the proteins encoded by this operon (KorA, KorFI, KorFII and KorB). We report 
here that transcription from the kfrA promoter is autoregulated by the kfrA gene 
product. We have purified KfrA, which is an acidic polypeptide of 308 amino acid 
residues, and show that it is a site-specific DNA-binding protein whose operator 
overlaps the primary kfrA promoter. Deletion analysis suggests that this activity
is critically dependent on the N-terminal section of KfrA, which appears to
contain an alpha-helix-beta-turn-alpha-helix motif. Circular dichroism confirmed 
the structural prediction that KfrA is almost entirely alpha-helical. The
position of predicted turns suggests that, while amino acid residues 1 to 80 may 
form a globular domain of four or five helices, residues 80 to 280 of KfrA may
adopt an extended coiled-coil domain containing a heptad repeat segment, which is
probably responsible for formation of the multimers detected by crosslinking. The
possibility that this unusual structure serves a second function, for example in 
providing a bridge to host structures required for plasmid partitioning, is
discussed.

DOI: 10.1016/0022-2836(92)90392-w 
PMID: 1602476  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


477. J Mol Endocrinol. 1992 Jun;8(3):225-34.

RNA-protein interactions in the 5' untranslated region of preproinsulin mRNA.

Knight SW(1), Docherty K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Birmingham, Queen Elizabeth Hospital,
U.K.

A comparison between species of the 5' untranslated region of preproinsulin mRNA 
revealed conserved sequences associated with a potential stem-loop structure. The
present study was undertaken to determine whether specific protein interactions
exist with mRNA sequences involved in the formation or stabilization of this
structure in the 5' untranslated region. 32P-Labelled RNA probes corresponding to
sequences from this region were synthesized by an in-vitro transcription reaction
and used in electrophoretic mobility shift and u.v.-crosslinking studies with
cytoplasmic protein extracts from a number of cell lines. Specific protein-RNA
interactions were mapped to a sequence located between nucleotides -21 and -50
upstream of the AUG start codon. A number of proteins of molecular mass 25 kDa,
40kDa, 46kDa, 58kDa, 69kDa, 97kDa, 110kDa and 160kDa were specifically
crosslinked to this sequence. The observed specific protein-RNA interactions in
the 5' untranslated region may affect the activity of preproinsulin mRNA.


PMID: 1632895  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


478. J Exp Med. 1992 Jun 1;175(6):1669-76.

Functional reconstitution of an immunoglobulin antigen receptor in T cells.

Costa TE(1), Franke RR, Sanchez M, Misulovin Z, Nussenzweig MC.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Rockefeller University, New York, New York
10021.

Humoral immune responses are initiated by binding of antigen to the
immunoglobulins (Igs) on the plasma membrane of B lymphocytes. On the cell
surface, Ig forms a complex with several other proteins, two of which, MB-1 and
B29, have been implicated in receptor assembly. We have reconstituted Ig receptor
function in T lymphocytes by transfection of cloned receptor components. We found
that efficient transport of IgM to the surface of T cells required coexpression
of B29. Furthermore, IgM and B29 alone were sufficient to reconstitute
antigen-specific signal transduction by Ig in the transfected T cells.
Crosslinking of IgM with either antireceptor antibodies or antigen induced a
calcium flux, phosphoinositol turnover, and interleukin secretion in T cells.
These experiments establish a requirement for B29 in Ig receptor function, and
suggest that the signaling apparatus of T and B cells is structurally homologous.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.175.6.1669 
PMCID: PMC2119247
PMID: 1588287  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1992 May 15;89(10):4476-80.

Organization and evolution of the human epidermal keratinocyte transglutaminase I
gene.

Polakowska RR(1), Eickbush T, Falciano V, Razvi F, Goldsmith LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Rochester, NY 14642.

Transglutaminases (TGases; protein-glutamine:amine gamma-glutamyltransferase, EC 
2.3.2.13) are calcium-dependent crosslinking enzymes that modify proteins
posttranslationally. Several distinct types of TGases have been identified, which
appear to be encoded by a family of closely related genes. We isolated the gene
encoding human keratinocyte-specific type I TGase (TGase I) and characterized its
chromosomal organization. The TGase I gene consists of 15 exons separated by 14
introns and exhibits a restriction fragment length polymorphism. Exons appear to 
encode functional and/or structural domains: exon I and part of exon XV encode
untranslated regions, whereas exons VII and XI contain the active site and a
presumptive calcium-binding domain, respectively. Interestingly, exon VI of TGase
I contains a consensus Arg-Gly-Asp tripeptide sequence whose presence suggests an
intriguing extracellular function for the enzyme. We present a likely
phylogenetic tree for seven known members of the TGase family based on amino acid
sequence similarity. Arguments presented suggest that the active enzyme evolved
first and the structural human erythrocyte membrane protein 4.2 (band 4.2) has
undergone a rapid change in amino acid sequence. It follows that band 4.2 evolved
from the type II TGases, whereas factor XIII subunit a evolved from the type I
group.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.89.10.4476 
PMCID: PMC49105
PMID: 1350092  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Nucleic Acids Res. 1992 May 11;20(9):2361-6.

Identification of exon sequences and an exon binding protein involved in
alternative RNA splicing of calcitonin/CGRP.

Cote GJ(1), Stolow DT, Peleg S, Berget SM, Gagel RF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030.

Transcripts derived from the 6 exon CALC I gene are differentially processed in a
tissue-specific fashion to include or exclude a calcitonin-specific exon 4. All
cell types which transcribe a second calcitonin/CGRP gene, CALC II, exclude exon 
4. Substitution of the first 30 nucleotides of CALC I exon 4 with analogous CALC 
II sequence was sufficient to prevent recognition of exon 4 in in vitro or in
vivo RNA splicing systems. UV crosslinking detected a approximately 66 kDa
RNA-binding protein in HeLa nuclear extract which interacted with CALC I proximal
exon sequence, but not CALC II or mutant sequences. UV crosslinking of this
protein was inhibited by addition of nuclear extract from a cell type which
normally causes exclusion of exon 4. These results identify an important
regulatory element within exon 4 and support a model in which calcitonin
production requires protein interaction with this sequence to facilitate exon
recognition.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/20.9.2361 
PMCID: PMC312354
PMID: 1594453  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Mol Immunol. 1992 May;29(5):619-24.

Egr-1 mRNA expression is independent of regulatory proliferative responses in the
immature B cell line WEHI-231.

Iwabuchi N(1), Williams DB, Nguyen HP, Hozumi N.

Author information: 
(1)Mount Sinai Hospital, Department of Medical Genetics and Immunology,
University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

We have recently reported cellular growth arrest induced following crosslinking
of surface IgM (sIgM) but not surface IgD (sIgD) in the WEHI-231 cell line,
representative of the immature B cell stage, and its delta heavy chain (delta)
transfectant. An initial report has indicated WEHI-231.7, a subclone of WEHI-231,
failed to express Egr-1 mRNA following sIgM crosslinking, in contrast to
significant up-regulation found in mature B lymphocytes. The implication for
linkage between selective surface immunoglobulin (sIg) signal transduction,
expression of immediate/early genes and control of cellular growth imposes an
attractive model for induction of immature B cell tolerance. Our investigations
examined the relationships between Egr-1 mRNA expression and growth regulation in
WEHI-231, WEHI-231.7 and their respective delta-transfectants (WEHI-delta,
WEHI-delta 7). We report sIgM and sIgD crosslinking leads to a rapid increase of 
Egr-1 mRNA expression in WEHI-231 and WEHI-delta but not in the subclone
WEHI-231.7 and WEHI-delta 7. Nevertheless, both WEHI-231, WEHI-231.7 and their
delta-transfectants demonstrate the ability to induce growth arrest following
sIgM but not sIgD crosslinking. Furthermore, we found Egr-1 expression could be
achieved by direct activation of protein kinase C (PKC) by phorbol 12-myristate
13-acetate (PMA) circumventing the classical sIg activated phosphatidylinositol
signal transduction pathway. Our results suggest Egr-1 expression does not
directly participate in growth regulation of immature B cell clones but rather is
a consequence of signal transduction through sIg.

DOI: 10.1016/0161-5890(92)90198-7 
PMID: 1584230  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


482. J Exp Med. 1992 May 1;175(5):1353-65.

Epidermal Langerhans cells from normal human skin bind monomeric IgE via Fc
epsilon RI.

Wang B(1), Rieger A, Kilgus O, Ochiai K, Maurer D, Födinger D, Kinet JP, Stingl
G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology I, University of Vienna Medical School, Austria.

Human epidermal Langerhans cells (LC) bearing IgE are found in disease states
associated with hyperimmunoglobulinemia E. When studying the mechanism(s)
underlying this phenomenon, immunohistology revealed that a majority of epidermal
LC from normal skin of healthy individuals can specifically bind monomeric IgE.
IgE binding to LC could neither be prevented by preincubation of the tissue with 
monoclonal antibodies (mAb) against either Fc epsilon RII/CD23 or Fc gamma
RII/CD32, nor by the addition of lactose. However, binding could be entirely
abrogated by preincubation with the anti-Fc epsilon RI alpha mAb 15-1, which
interferes with IgE binding to Fc epsilon RI alpha gamma transfectants. These
observations indicated that IgE binding to epidermal LC is mediated by Fc epsilon
RI rather than by CD23, CD32, or the D-galactose-specific IgE-binding protein.
This assumption gained support from our additional findings that: (a) the
majority of LC exhibited distinct surface immunolabeling with the anti-Fc epsilon
RI alpha mAbs 15-1 and 19-1, but not with any of eight different anti-Fc epsilon 
RII/CD23 mAbs; and (b) transcripts for the alpha, beta, and gamma chains of Fc
epsilon RI could be amplified by polymerase chain reaction from RNA preparations 
of LC-enriched, but not of LC-depleted, epidermal cell suspensions. In view of
the preeminent role of Fc epsilon RI crosslinking on mast cells and basophils in 
triggering the synthesis and release of mediators of allergic reactions, the
demonstration of this receptor on epidermal LC may have important implications
for our understanding of allergic reactions after epicutaneous contact with
allergens.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.175.5.1353 
PMCID: PMC2119204
PMID: 1533243  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Cell Immunol. 1992 Apr;140(2):478-94.

Differential effects of cyclosporin A on diverse B cell activation phenomena
triggered by crosslinking of membrane IgM.

Mongini PK(1), Blessinger CA, Dalton JP, Seki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatic Diseases, Hospital for Joint Diseases, New York, New
York 10003.

Cyclosporin A (CsA) was tested for its modulatory effects on the mIgM-mediated
signaling of G0*-associated increases in class II MHC expression, G1-related RNA 
synthesis, and S phase-related DNA synthesis in human B cells. While CsA at
concentrations as low as 10-100 ng/ml could completely ablate anti-IgM-induced
DNA synthesis, earlier G1-associated RNA synthesis was only partially inhibited, 
and signaling of increased membrane class II MHC expression was unaffected by up 
to 1000 ng/ml of CsA. Similar phenomena were observed in a clonal population of
leukemic B lymphocytes susceptible to anti-IgM-mediated activation in the absence
of T cells and T cell factors indicating (a) that the inhibitory effects are not 
due to CsA-mediated suppression of cytokine production by contaminating T cells, 
and (b) that the varying effects of CsA on the diverse activation phenomena do
not reflect B cell subpopulation diversity. Pulsing studies revealed that while
maximal suppression of anti-IgM-induced G1-associated RNA synthesis required CsA 
at culture initiation, near maximal suppression of DNA synthesis occurred when
CsA, or soluble human IgM, was added up to 30 hr after the initial exposure of
resting B cells to the anti-IgM ligand. These latter findings are consistent with
the possibility that the CsA-mediated suppression of S phase entry is due to the 
inhibition of a signaling event proximal to mIgM ligation which must be
repeatedly initiated throughout the first 30 hr of activation.

DOI: 10.1016/0008-8749(92)90213-9 
PMID: 1371950  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Virology. 1992 Mar;187(1):63-72.

Activation of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 provirus in T-cells and
macrophages is associated with induction of inducer-specific NF-kappa B binding
proteins.

Vlach J(1), Pitha PM.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Center, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland 21231.

We have analyzed the limiting factors involved in the induction of human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) provirus expression by tumor necrosis
factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate (PMA), and bryostatin-1
in T-cells (ACH-2) and monocytes (U1). We have demonstrated that, while there is 
a correlation among the increase of 9.2-kilodalton (kDa) HIV-1 RNA, the increase 
of viral proteins (p24) in the cells, and the release of HIV-1 virions into the
medium, there is no direct correlation between the levels of induced NF-kappa B
binding proteins and the expression of HIV-1 provirus. The presence of nuclear
NF-kappa B-specific proteins appears to be essential only for the initiation of
viral replication, since the HIV-1 transcripts could be detected in TNF-alpha or 
bryostatin-1-stimulated cells also at later times postinduction, times when no
NF-kappa B proteins could be detected in the nucleus. The uv crosslinking of DNA 
and proteins has shown that TNF-alpha, PMA, and bryostatin-1 induce different
sets of NF-kappa B binding proteins with distinct kinetics of binding.

DOI: 10.1016/0042-6822(92)90295-z 
PMID: 1371030  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Growth Factors. 1992;7(1):73-83.

Kupffer cells express type I TGF-beta receptors, migrate to TGF-beta and
participate in streptococcal cell wall induced hepatic granuloma formation.

Kossmann T(1), Manthey CL, Brandes ME, Morganti-Kossmann MC, Ohura K, Allen JB,
Mergenhagen SE, Wahl SM.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular Immunology Section, National Institute of Dental Research, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

Intraperitoneal injection of Group A streptococcal cell wall (SCW) fragments into
female Lewis rats results in the induction of an acute hepatic inflammation that 
progresses to granulomatous lesions. Kupffer cells have been shown to rapidly
clear circulating SCW which triggers production of TGF-beta. In this study, we
examined Kupffer cells for the expression of TGF-beta receptors to determine if
these cells might be modulated in an autocrine/paracrine fashion by TGF-beta
during SCW-hepatic inflammation. By receptor crosslinking and subsequent SDS-PAGE
analysis we demonstrate that Kupffer cells express Type I TGF-beta receptors, but
not Types II and III. Scatchard analysis indicated a receptor density of
approximately 1100 receptors per cell. Functionally, TGF-beta was found to be
chemotactic for Kupffer cells in vitro and this chemotactic response was higher
in cells isolated from rats 1-21 days post SCW-injection. Although TGF-beta 1
mRNA is constitutively expressed by Kupffer cells, in vitro stimulation of the
cultures with purified TGF-beta augments the expression of TGF-beta 1 mRNA and
protein synthesis suggesting autocrine/paracrine regulation. These results
indicate that TGF beta secreted by Kupffer cells during SCW-induced hepatic
inflammation may amplify its own expression and regulate Kupffer cell functions
relevant to the formation of granulomatous lesions within the liver.


PMID: 1323980  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 Dec 11;19(23):6627-31.

Identification of a protein that interacts with the nuclear factor-1 (NF-1)
binding site in cells that do not express NF-1: comparison to NF-1, cellular
distribution, and effect on transcription.

McQuillan JJ(1), Rosen GD, Birkenmeier TM, Dean DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Cell Biology, Washington University School
of Medicine, St Louis, MO 63110.

We examined expression of nuclear factor-1 (NF-1) in different cell lines.
Expression was low or undetectable in T and B lymphocyte cell lines, whereas
fibroblasts and other adherent cell lines generally had a relatively high level
of NF-1 mRNA. In cell lines that did not express NF-1, gel retardation assays,
nevertheless, indicated complexes between a protein or proteins and the NF-1
site. These complexes were less abundant than those formed with NF-1, they
migrated more slowly, and they appeared as single species instead of the multiple
species observed with NF-1. NF-1 site-binding proteins were compared in the
fibrosarcoma cell line HT-1080 (expressed the highest level of NF-1 in our study)
and the B cell line Raji (does not express NF-1). UV-crosslinking studies
indicated that the NF-1 site-binding proteins in both cell lines were similar in 
size. Proteolytic clipping band shift assays suggested that the Raji protein and 
NF-1 share structural similarity in their DNA binding domains, but are distinct
proteins. The NF-1 site mediated transcriptional stimulation in cell lines where 
NF-1 is expressed; however, this element did not affect transcription in cell
lines that do not express NF-1, suggesting that the NF-1 site-binding protein in 
these cells is functionally distinct from NF-1.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/19.23.6627 
PMCID: PMC329233
PMID: 1754398  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1991 Nov 15;88(22):10023-6.

Triple helix formation inhibits transcription elongation in vitro.

Young SL(1), Krawczyk SH, Matteucci MD, Toole JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Gilead Sciences, Inc., Foster City, CA 94404.

We have identified a 15-nucleotide site within a G-free transcription cassette
that forms triple helix with sequence-specific oligodeoxyribonucleotides. When
oligodeoxynucleotides were added to template DNA prior to in vitro transcription,
a significant fraction of transcripts were truncated at a site corresponding to
the region of triple helix formation. Kinetic analysis of the transcription
products demonstrated that these truncated transcripts could be elongated to full
length upon prolonged incubation. When an alkylating base was incorporated into
the oligodeoxynucleotide to form covalent triple helix, most of the transcripts
remained truncated. We conclude that triple helix formation can stall or, in the 
case of covalent crosslinking, can block RNA polymerase II and thus may provide a
method for the specific inhibition of gene expression.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.88.22.10023 
PMCID: PMC52859
PMID: 1946419  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1991 Nov 1;88(21):9648-52.

Reduced amounts of cartilage collagen fibrils and growth plate anomalies in
transgenic mice harboring a glycine-to-cysteine mutation in the mouse type II
procollagen alpha 1-chain gene.

Garofalo S(1), Vuorio E, Metsaranta M, Rosati R, Toman D, Vaughan J, Lozano G,
Mayne R, Ellard J, Horton W, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Texas, M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston 77030.

We have generated transgenic mice harboring a glycine-to-cysteine mutation in
residue 85 of the triple helical domain of mouse type II collagen. The offspring 
of different founders displayed a phenotype of severe chondrodysplasia
characterized by short limbs and trunk, cranio-facial deformities, and cleft
palate. The affected pups died of acute respiratory distress caused by an
inability to inflate lungs at birth. Staining of the skeleton showed a severe
retardation of growth for practically all bones. Light microscopic examination
indicated a decrease in cartilage matrix density, a severe disorganization of
growth plate architecture, and the presence of streaks of fibrillar material in
the cartilage matrix. Electron microscopic analysis showed a pronounced decrease 
in the number of typical thin cartilage collagen fibrils, distension of the rough
endoplasmic reticulum of chondrocytes, and the presence of abnormally large
banded collagen fibril bundles. The level of expression of the mutant type II
procollagen alpha 1 chain transgene in cartilage tissues was approximately equal 
to that of the endogenous gene in two of the strains. We propose that the
principal consequence of the mutation is a considerable reduction in density of
the typical thin cartilage collagen fibrils and that this phenomenon causes the
severe disorganization of the growth plate. We also postulate that the abnormal
thick collagen fibrils are probably related to a defect in crosslinking between
the collagen molecules. The cartilage anomalies displayed by these transgenic
mice are remarkably similar to those of certain human chondrodysplasias.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.88.21.9648 
PMCID: PMC52775
PMID: 1946380  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


489. J Cell Sci. 1991 Nov;100 ( Pt 3):481-9.

Dictyostelium discoideum contains two profilin isoforms that differ in structure 
and function.

Haugwitz M(1), Noegel AA, Rieger D, Lottspeich F, Schleicher M.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institute for Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany.

Two profilin isoforms (profilins I and II) have been purified from Dictyostelium 
discoideum, using affinity chromatography on a poly(L-proline) matrix; the
isoforms could be separated by cation-exchange chromatography on a FPLC system.
The gene coding for profilin I was cloned from a lambda gt11 cDNA library using a
profilin I-specific monoclonal antibody. The profilin II cDNA was isolated by
probing the cDNA library with an oligonucleotide deduced from the N-terminal
amino acid sequence of profilin II, which has an open N terminus in contrast to
profilin I. The deduced amino acid sequences of both genes show that profilin I
in comparison to profilin II is slightly larger (13,064 Da vs 12,729 Da), has a
more acidic isoelectric point (calc. pI 6.62 vs 7.26) and shares with profilin II
68 identical residues out of 126 amino acids. Although both profilins contain a
conserved lysine residue in the putative actin-binding region and can be
crosslinked covalently to G-actin, the crosslinking efficiency of profilin II to 
actin is substantially higher than that of profilin I. These data are in
agreement with studies on the functional properties of the profilin isoforms. In 
most preparations profilin II was more efficient in delaying the onset of
elongation during the course of actin polymerization and caused a higher critical
concentration for actin polymerization than profilin I, probably due to the
slightly increased affinity of profilin II for D. discoideum G-actin (approx. Kd 
1.8 x 10(-6) M) as compared to that of profilin I (approx. Kd 5.1 x 10(-6)
M).(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)


PMID: 1725525  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 Oct 25;19(20):5483-9.

The yeast PRP8 protein interacts directly with pre-mRNA.

Whittaker E(1), Beggs JD.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell and Molecular Biology, University of Edinburgh, UK.

The PRP8 protein of Saccharomyces cerevisiae is required for nuclear pre-mRNA
splicing. Previously, immunological procedures demonstrated that PRP8 is a
protein component of the U5 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein particle (U5 snRNP), 
and that PRP8 protein maintains a stable association with the spliceosome during 
both step 1 and step 2 of the splicing reaction. We have combined immunological
analysis with a UV-crosslinking assay to investigate interaction(s) of PRP8
protein with pre-mRNA. We show that PRP8 protein interacts directly with splicing
substrate RNA during in vitro splicing reactions. This contact event is
splicing-specific in that it is ATP-dependent, and does not occur with mutant
RNAs that contain 5' splice site or branchpoint mutations. The use of truncated
RNA substrates demonstrated that the assembly of PRP8 protein into splicing
complexes is not, by itself, sufficient for the direct interaction with the RNA; 
PRP8 protein only becomes UV-crosslinked to RNA substrates capable of
participating in step 1 of the splicing reaction. We propose that PRP8 protein
may play an important structural and/or regulatory role in the spliceosome.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/19.20.5483 
PMCID: PMC328946
PMID: 1945827  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 Oct 25;19(20):5653-9.

Different complexes are formed on the 3' end of histone mRNA with nuclear and
polyribosomal proteins.

Pandey NB(1), Sun JH, Marzluff WF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Florida State University, Tallahassee 32306.

Specific protein-RNA complexes are formed by incubating a synthetic histone mRNA 
3' end (a 30 nucleotide stem-loop structure) RNA with extracts of either nuclei
or polyribosomes. The complex formed between the stem-loop and nuclear proteins
has a lower electrophoretic mobility than the complex formed between the
stem-loop and polyribosomal proteins. Binding of the synthetic 3' end by both
polyribosomal and nuclear proteins is abolished when two of the conserved uridine
residues in the loop are replaced with adenosines. UV crosslinking of the protein
complexes to the synthetic RNA resulted in transferring radiolabel to similar
sized proteins, 50 kD, in both the nuclear and polyribosomal extracts.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/19.20.5653 
PMCID: PMC328971
PMID: 1834994  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Mol Cell Biol. 1991 Oct;11(10):5181-9.

Two components of Saccharomyces cerevisiae transcription factor IIIB (TFIIIB) are
stereospecifically located upstream of a tRNA gene and interact with the
second-largest subunit of TFIIIC.

Bartholomew B(1), Kassavetis GA, Geiduschek EP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla
92093-0634.

A novel photocrosslinking method has been used to identify the components of
transcription factor IIIB (TFIIIB) and TFIIIC that associate with DNA upstream of
the Saccharomyces cerevisiae SUP4 tRNATyr gene and to map these components to
specific positions in DNA. When TFIIIC binds to the tRNA gene, only its
second-largest subunit (135 kDa) is accessible for reaction with a photoactive
nucleotide, 5-[N-(p-azidobenzoyl)-3-aminoallyl]-dUMP, inserted into DNA upstream 
of the transcriptional start. Formation of TFIII(C + B)-tRNA gene complexes
specifically brings two additional polypeptides (90 and 70 kDa) within reach of
upstream photoprobes. A collection of 13 probes has been used to map the
locations of these three proteins along a 45-bp segment of DNA upstream of the
transcriptional start site. Evidence is presented that the 90- and 70-kDa
polypeptides are separate and distinct components of yeast TFIIIB, that they are 
accessible to crosslinking on opposite sides of the DNA helix in a 6-bp segment
centered 35 bp upstream of the tRNATyr gene transcriptional start, and that they 
interact with the second-largest subunit of TFIIIC.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.11.10.5181 
PMCID: PMC361548
PMID: 1922038  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Trends Biochem Sci. 1991 Sep;16(9):323-6.

Crosslinking proteins to nucleic acids by ultraviolet laser irradiation.

Pashev IG(1), Dimitrov SI, Angelov D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, Sofia.

Ultraviolet (UV) irradiation can initiate complex formation between proteins and 
DNA or RNA and so can be used to study such interactions. However, crosslink
formation by standard UV light sources can take up to several hours. More
recently, a beam of monochromatic UV light from a laser has been used to initiate
crosslinking in nano- and picosecond time intervals. As noted in an earlier TIBS 
article 'the advantages of short pulse times and high-energy fluxes should make
this a valuable technique in the future'. In this review we characterize
laser-induced crosslinking and explore the applications of this method.

DOI: 10.1016/0968-0004(91)90133-g 
PMID: 1835191  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Cell Immunol. 1991 Sep;136(2):291-302.

Growth hormone releasing hormone receptors on thymocytes and splenocytes from
rats.

Guarcello V(1), Weigent DA, Blalock JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Alabama, Birmingham
35294.

In the present study, we determined that rat mononuclear leukocytes possess
specific receptors for growth hormone releasing hormone (GHRH). The results show 
that the binding of 125I-labeled GHRH to spleen and thymic cells was saturable
and of a high affinity, approximately 3.5 and 2.5 nM for thymus and spleen cells,
respectively. The Scatchard analysis revealed a binding capacity of approximately
54 and 35 fmol per 10(6) cells on thymus and spleen, respectively. The binding of
GHRH was not competed by 10(-6) M growth hormone, corticotropin releasing factor,
substance P or luteinizing hormone releasing hormone and vasointestinal peptide
(VIP). Partial characterization of the receptor was accomplished by crosslinking 
125I-labeled GHRH to thymus cells with disuccinimidyl suberate and polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis. Autoradiography of dried gels showed two major components in
leukocytes and pituitary cells at approximately 42 and 27 kDa which could be
diminished by unlabeled GHRH. The treatment of leukocytes with GHRH (10 nM)
rapidly increased the intracellular free calcium concentration from a basal level
of 70 +/- 20 nM to a plateau value of 150 +/- 20 nM in 6 min after stimulation.
The functional activity of GHRH receptors was studied further by measuring
lymphocyte proliferative responses and the increase in the level of cytoplasmic
GH RNA. The presence of GHRH alone resulted in a dose-dependent increase in
thymidine and uridine incorporation and a dose-dependent increase in the levels
of GH RNA in the cytoplasm. Taken together, the results show that lymphocytes
contain specific receptors for GHRH that are coupled to important biological
responses and further support the concept of bidirectional communication between 
the immune and neuroendocrine tissues.

DOI: 10.1016/0008-8749(91)90353-d 
PMID: 1714793  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 Aug 11;19(15):4253-7.

Characterization of the CRPCY core formed after treatment with carboxypeptidase
Y.

Yang ZH(1), Bobin S, Krakow JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Hunter College of CUNY, NY 10021.

CRP is resistant to attack by carboxypeptidase Y at 37 degrees C, whereas
cAMP-CRP is digested yielding a core terminating at Thr-202 and lacking the seven
carboxyl-terminal amino acid residues. A similar core (CRPCY) is formed when CRP 
is incubated with carboxypeptidase Y at 47 degrees C in the absence of cAMP.
CRPCY has a more open conformation than CRP at 37 degrees C. While unliganded CRP
is resistant to trypsin, CRPCY is sensitive to tryptic attack. Dithionitrobenzoic
acid-mediated intersubunit disulfide crosslinking of CRP requires cAMP, CRPCY
subunits are crosslinked in the absence of cAMP. The carboxyl-terminal region of 
unliganded CRP is conformationally restricted at 37 degrees C. The CRPCY retains 
cAMP binding activity. The CRPCY which terminates at Thr-202, no longer binds lac
P+ DNA nor stimulates abortive initiation by RNA polymerase from the lac P+
promoter. The results indicate that the C-terminal region of CRP participates in 
the conformational stability of the closed form of CRP and indirectly in DNA
binding by the open cAMP-CRP conformer.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/19.15.4253 
PMCID: PMC328570
PMID: 1651482  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


496. J Mol Biol. 1991 Jul 20;220(2):227-39.

Sigma subunit of Escherichia coli RNA polymerase loses contacts with the 3' end
of the nascent RNA after synthesis of a tetranucleotide.

Bowser CA(1), Hanna MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of California, Irvine 92717.

We have used photocrosslinking to analyze the contacts between the 3' end of the 
RNA and Escherichia coli RNA polymerase during the early steps of RNA synthesis
using the nucleotide analog 8-azido-ATP (8-N3-ATP). The crosslinking group on
8-N3-ATP contacts the beta, beta' and sigma subunits when the analog is bound to 
the holoenzyme. We show here that 8-N3-ATP is a substrate for E. coli RNA
polymerase and acts as an RNA chain terminator when incorporated into the 3' end 
of nascent RNA. 8-N3-AMP was incorporated uniquely at the 3' end of tri-, tetra- 
and pentanucleotides synthesized from a poly[d(A-T)] template and at the 3' end
of pentanucleotides from two promoters (lambda PR' and E. coli rrnB P1). The
oligonucleotides were covalently attached to the RNA polymerase by irradiation of
transcription complexes with ultraviolet light. All RNAs labeled the beta and
beta' subunits, but sigma was contacted only by the trinucleotide and
tetranucleotide on poly[d(A-T)]. Sigma is still present in transcription
complexes containing the pentanucleotide on poly[d(A-T)], despite the lack of
labeling. Neither pentanucleotide from the authentic promoters contacted sigma.
We conclude that as holoenzyme moves downstream, either two separate
conformational changes occur, after synthesis of the trinucleotide and
tetranucleotide, which result in movement of sigma away from the nucleotide
binding site or, alternatively, sigma remains fixed relative to the DNA while the
domain on core polymerase forming the nucleotide binding site moves downstream.

DOI: 10.1016/0022-2836(91)90009-u 
PMID: 1713273  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1991 Jul 15;88(14):6013-7.

Substrate inhibition of the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 reverse
transcriptase.

Furman PA(1), Painter G, Wilson JE, Cheng N, Hopkins S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Virology, Burroughs Wellcome Co., Research Triangle Park, NC
27709.

Substrate inhibition was observed with the heterodimeric (p66/p51) and the
homodimeric (p66/p66, p51/p51) forms of human immunodeficiency virus type 1
reverse transcriptase (RNA-dependent DNA polymerase, EC 2.7.7.49). An apparent Ki
value of 195 +/- 37 microM was determined for dTTP using the bacterial cloned and
expressed heterodimer. Similar values were obtained with the homodimeric and the 
virus-encoded enzymes. When poly-(rC).p(dG)10 was used as template-primer, dGTP
exhibited substrate inhibition with an apparent Ki value of 189 +/- 32 microM.
Substrate inhibition was not observed with dTTP when DNA.DNA template-primers
were used. Hill coefficients for substrate binding determined in the presence of 
saturating concentrations of template-primer were equal to 1.0, suggesting that
substrate inhibition of the heterodimer is not the result of an allosteric
mechanism involving the p51 subunit. Furthermore, UV crosslinking experiments
with [gamma-32P]dTTP showed crosslinking only to the p66 subunit. Substrate
inhibition was not as pronounced with other retroviral reverse transcriptases as 
it was with human immunodeficiency type 1 reverse transcriptase.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.88.14.6013 
PMCID: PMC52012
PMID: 1712479  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


498. J Exp Med. 1991 Jun 1;173(6):1473-82.

IgM anti-Fc gamma R autoantibodies trigger neutrophil degranulation.

Boros P(1), Odin JA, Muryoi T, Masur SK, Bona C, Unkeless JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York
10029.

Anti-Fc gamma R IgM monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) isolated from
lipopolysaccharide-stimulated spleen cells from tightskin (TSK) mice were found
to be polyspecific, reacting with a wide variety of molecules, including
double-stranded DNA, topoisomerase, RNA polymerase, and different collagen types.
Approximately 60% of the polyspecific IgM mAbs have anti-Fc gamma R specificity. 
These anti-Fc gamma R mAbs induce the release of hydrolases from both azurophil
and specific granules of human neutrophils. 25-45% of the total cellular content 
(determined in Nonidet P-40 lysates) of neutrophil elastase, 10-25% of
beta-glucuronidase, and 30-50% of alkaline phosphatase was released after
incubation with the mAbs. The degranulation process was accompanied by dramatic
morphological changes shown by scanning and transmission electron microscopy. The
release of hydrolytic enzymes stimulated by the IgM anti-Fc gamma R mAbs was
inhibited by preincubation of neutrophils with Fab fragments of either anti-human
Fc gamma RII (IV.3) or anti-human Fc gamma RIII (3G8) mAbs. The binding of the
anti-Fc gamma R TSK mAbs to human neutrophils was inhibited by Fab fragments of
mAb 3G8. However, we found that the TSK anti-Fc gamma R mAbs do not bind to human
Fc gamma RII expressed in either CHO cells or the P388D1 mouse macrophage cell
line. Since the enzyme release could be inhibited by Fab fragments of mAb IV.3,
we suggest that the signal transduction may require Fc gamma RII activation
subsequent to crosslinking of the glycan phosphatidyl inositol-anchored Fc gamma 
RIII-1. These data demonstrate for the first time that polyspecific
autoantibodies with Fc gamma R specificity can trigger neutrophil enzyme release 
via human Fc gamma RIII-1 in vitro and indicate a possible role for such
autoantibodies in autoimmune inflammatory processes.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.173.6.1473 
PMCID: PMC2190825
PMID: 1827827  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Hum Genet. 1991 Jun;87(2):193-8.

Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type VII: a single base change that causes exon skipping
in the type I collagen alpha 2(I) chain.

Nicholls AC(1), Oliver J, Renouf DV, McPheat J, Palan A, Pope FM.

Author information: 
(1)Dermatology Research Group, Clinical Research Centre, Harrow, UK.

We have examined the procollagens and collagens produced by skin fibroblasts from
a patient with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type VII. The patient was heterozygous for 
an abnormal alpha 2(I) chain migrating with the approximate size of pN alpha 2(I)
chains after pepsin digestion. Peptide mapping suggested that the abnormality was
located at the amino-terminus of the alpha 2(I) chain. Quantitative analysis of
the alpha 2(I) mRNA indicated loss of the exon 6 sequences, and subsequent
polymerase chain reaction amplification of cDNA demonstrated a deletion of the 54
bp of exon 6 from some of the alpha 2(I) mRNA. Analysis of genomic DNA from the
patient revealed a single base change in one COL1A2 allele, substituting an A for
a G as the first base of intron 6. This change mutates the obligate
GT-dinulceotide splicing signal to AT and leads to exon skipping with splicing
from exon 5 to exon 7. Loss of exon 6 sequences results in the loss of the
procollagen-N-propeptidase cleavage site and a lysine residue that normally
participates in covalent intermolecular crosslinking within collagen fibres.

DOI: 10.1007/bf00204180 
PMID: 1712342  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 May 11;19(9):2289-94.

An estrogen-dependent polysomal protein binds to the 5' untranslated region of
the chicken vitellogenin mRNA.

Liang HM(1), Jost JP.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich-Miescher Institute, Basel, Switzerland.

An estrogen-dependent protein present in chicken liver polysomes binds to the 5' 
untranslated region of the chicken vitellogenin II mRNA. Competition binding
assays with different RNAs indicate that the binding of the polysomal protein to 
this region is sequence specific. Of the tissues tested, this RNA binding
activity is liver specific. In vivo kinetics of appearance of the binding
activity following a single injection of estrogen to immature chicks are similar 
to the rate of accumulation of vitellogenin mRNA. The molecular weight of the
polysomal protein has been estimated to be 66,000 on the basis of UV crosslinking
and subsequent SDS polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. In vitro RNA decay assays 
carried out with a minivitellogenin mRNA suggest that the estrogen-dependent
polysomal protein may be involved in the estrogen-mediated stabilization of the
chicken vitellogenin II mRNA.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/19.9.2289 
PMCID: PMC329432
PMID: 1904152  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Mol Cell Biol. 1991 Apr;11(4):2245-52.

Differential introduction of DNA damage and repair in mammalian genes transcribed
by RNA polymerases I and II.

Vos JM(1), Wauthier EL.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Research Center, University of North Carolina 
School of Medicine, Chapel Hill 27599-7295.

We have developed a general quantitative method for comparing the levels of
drug-induced DNA crosslinking in specific mammalian genes. We observed a dramatic
difference between the efficiency of the removal of both psoralen monoadducts and
interstrand crosslinks from the rRNA genes and the efficiency of their removal
from the dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) gene in cultured human and hamster cells.
While 90% of the interstand crosslinks were removed from the human DHFR gene in
48 h, less than 25% repair occurred in the rRNA genes. Similarly, in Chinese
hamster ovary cells, 85% repair of interstrand crosslinks occurred within 8 h in 
the DHFR gene versus only 20% repair in the rRNA genes. The preferential repair
of the DHFR gene relative to that of the rRNA genes was also observed for
psoralen monoadducts in cells from both mammalian species. In human-mouse hybrid 
cells, the active mouse rRNA genes were five times more susceptible to psoralen
modification than are the silent rRNA human genes, but adduct removal was
similarly inefficient for both classes. We conclude that the repair of chemical
damage such as psoralen photoadducts in an expressed mammalian gene may depend
upon the class of transcription to which it belongs.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.11.4.2245 
PMCID: PMC359922
PMID: 2005908  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Anticancer Res. 1991 Mar-Apr;11(2):947-52.

Coordinate change of c-myc, transferrin receptor and H3 gene expression precedes 
induction of haemoglobin-producing cells of the leukaemia K562 cell line treated 
with cis-diamminedichloroplatinum (II).

Marazzi L(1), Parodi MT, Di Martino D, Ferrari S, Tonini GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology and Oncology, G. Gaslini Children's Hospital,
Genova, Italy.

Erythroid cell differentiation can be achieved in vitro by means of several
chemical or natural agents. Cell differentiation is accompanied by biochemical
and molecular changes which show that the inducer is active at different
molecular levels. Among the chemical agents that are able to induce cell
differentiation, the anticancer drugs are of great interest for the emerging
study of in vitro and in vivo models for differentiation treatment.
Cis-diamminedichloroplatinum II (CDDP), a crosslinking DNA compound, is usually
employed at a high dosage in treating solid tumors. We have demonstrated that
CDDP was also able to induce K562 cells towards erythroid differentiation. In our
experiment 2.5 micrograms/ml of CDDP caused expression of alpha-globin chain gene
and production of haemoglobulin. Continuous presence of the drug was not
necessary to induce the cell to produce haemoglobin. Five days after CDDP
treatment, the expression of c-myc oncogene had risen, while H3 histone mRNA
expression fell to undetectable levels within 24 hours. Transferrin (Tf) receptor
mRNA was reduced but later (about 48 hours) than c-myc and H3 messenger RNAs. The
inhibition of cell proliferation was correlated both with the reduced expression 
of Tf receptor mRNA and low expression of the protein. However, expression of the
cytoskeleton vimentin gene was only slightly affected during the time-course of
the experiment. Data show that at least three phases were present in the
irreversible CDDP induction of haemoglobin synthesis in the K562 cell. The
erythroid differentiation was first preceded by a rise of c-myc mRNA, which
probably precommits the cell towards the erythroid lineage. The mRNA levels of
the cell-cycle dependent genes, H3 and Tf receptor, decreased and inhibition of
DNA synthesis and loss of cell proliferation were detected. Finally, the
alpha-globin chain gene was actively transcribed and the cell produced
haemoglobin.


PMID: 2064352  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 Feb 25;19(4):751-7.

Interaction of HIV-1 reverse transcriptase with a synthetic form of its
replication primer, tRNA(Lys,3).

Barat C(1), Le Grice SF, Darlix JL.

Author information: 
(1)CRBGC du CNRS, Toulouse, France.

Using synthetic oligonucleotides, a gene encoding the HIV-1 replication primer,
tRNA(Lys,3), was constructed and placed downstream from a bacteriophage T7
promoter. In vitro transcription of this gene yielded a form of tRNA(Lys,3) which
lacks the modified bases characteristic of the natural species and the 3'
-C-A-dinucleotide. Synthetic tRNA(Lys,3) annealed to a pbs-HIV1 RNA template can 
prime cDNA synthesis catalysed by recombinant HIV-1 reverse transcriptase.
Trans-DDP crosslinking indicates that this synthetic tRNA is still capable of
interacting with HIV-1 RT via a 12-nucleotide portion encompassing the anticodon 
domain. Gel-mobility shift and competition analyses imply that the affinity of
synthetic tRNA for RT is reduced. In contrast to earlier observations, synthetic 
tRNA is readily competed from RT by natural tRNA(Pro). The reduced affinity of
synthetic tRNA(Lys,3) for RT is not appreciably affected by mutations in
positions within the loop of the anticodon domain. These results would imply that
the overall structure of the anticodon domain of tRNA(Lys,3) is an important
factor in its recognition by HIV-1 RT. In addition, modified bases within this,
although not absolutely required, would appear to make a significant contribution
to the enhanced stability of the ribonucleoprotein complex.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/19.4.751 
PMCID: PMC333707
PMID: 1708122  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1991 Jan 31;174(2):785-9.

Crosslinking of substrates occurs exclusively to the p66 subunit of heterodimeric
HIV-1 reverse transcriptase.

Cheng N(1), Painter GR, Furman PA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Virology, Burroughs Wellcome Co., Research Triangle Park, NC
27709.

Photoaffinity labeling of the hetero- and homodimeric forms of HIV-1 reverse
transcriptase has been carried out using [32P]rA12-18.dT10 as a representative
template-primer and [alpha-32P]dTTP as a representative
2'-deoxynucleoside-5'-triphosphate. UV irradiation produces stable, covalent
crosslinks between each of the reactants and both the hetero-(p66/p51) and
homodimeric (p66/p66, p51/p51) forms of the enzyme. In the case of the p66/p51
heterodimer, the form of the enzyme believed to be involved in viral replication,
crosslinking occurs exclusively to the p66 subunit. These results suggest that
the polymerase activity of the heterodimer residues on p66.

DOI: 10.1016/0006-291x(91)91486-v 
PMID: 1704228  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Mutat Res. 1991 Jan;254(1):55-64.

The sensitivities of SV40-transformed human fibroblasts to monofunctional and
DNA-crosslinking alkylating agents.

Miyakoshi J(1), Scudiero DA, Allalunis-Turner J, Day RS 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Cross Cancer Institute, Edmonton, Alb., Canada.

4 repair-deficient (Mer-) and 2 repair-proficient (Mer+) lines of
SV40-transformed human fibroblasts were assayed for colony-forming ability after 
treatment with MNNG, methyl methanesulfonate (MMS),
1,3-bis-(2-chloroethyl)-1-nitrosourea (BCNU), and
1-(2-chloroethyl)-3-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-nitrosourea (HECNU). The sensitivities to 
MMS, BCNU and HECNU of these SV40-transformed lines were similar to those of
comparably treated human tumor cells observed previously. However, unlike human
tumor lines, whose post-MNNG survival is strongly dependent upon Mer phenotype,
SV40-transformed lines showed a lack of dependence of post-MNNG colony-forming
ability on Mer phenotype. No differences in glutathione levels that might explain
these differences were detected. The amounts of SV40-specific DNA and RNA among
the lines were found to vary widely, but no correlation with Mer phenotype was
found.

DOI: 10.1016/0921-8777(91)90040-v 
PMID: 1846027  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Nucleic Acids Res. 1990 Nov 11;18(21):6215-22.

Gene F of plasmid RSF1010 codes for a low-molecular-weight repressor protein that
autoregulates expression of the repAC operon.

Maeser S(1), Scholz P, Otto S, Scherzinger E.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Genetik, Abteilung Schuster, Berlin, FRG.

The repAC operon of plasmid RSF1010 consists of the genes for proteins E, F, RepA
(DNA helicase), and RepC (origin-binding initiator protein) and is
transcriptionally initiated by a promoter called P4. We have studied the
expression of the repAC operon in vivo by using fusions to the lacZ reporter
gene. The results show that the product of the second gene, F, autoregulates the 
operon by inhibiting transcription from P4. To verify its properties postulated
from the in vivo studies and to initiate its biochemical characterization, we
have purified the F protein from an overproducing E.coli strain constructed in
vitro. Purification was based on a gel retardation assay for detection of
P4-specific DNA binding. Subsequent DNase footprinting of the F binding sites
showed clear protection around two partially symmetric P4 sequences of 16 bp,
each of which matches the symmetric consensus sequence, GCGTGAGTACTCACGC, in at
least 13 positions. The native repressor, as judged from gel filtration, velocity
sedimentation and crosslinking studies, exists as a dimer in dilute solution; its
monomeric subunit, as predicted from DNA sequence and N-terminal protein sequence
data, consists of 68 amino acids and has a calculated M tau = 7,673.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/18.21.6215 
PMCID: PMC332484
PMID: 2243770  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Biochem Pharmacol. 1990 Nov 1;40(9):2069-78.

Mitoxantrone-DNA binding and the induction of topoisomerase II associated DNA
damage in multi-drug resistant small cell lung cancer cells.

Smith PJ(1), Morgan SA, Fox ME, Watson JV.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Clinical Oncology, MRC Centre, Cambridge, U.K.

The cytotoxicity anti-tumour intercalating agents such as the anthraquinone
mitoxantrone is thought to relate to DNA binding and the trapping of DNA
topoisomerase II complexes on cellular DNA. We have studied the uptake, nuclear
location, DNA binding mode and DNA damaging capacity of mitoxantrone in a small
cell lung carcinoma cell line (NCI-H69) compared with an in vitro-derived variant
subline (NCI-H69/LX4) that exhibits "classical" multi-drug resistance (MDR).
Variant cells maintained under doxorubicin selection showed reduced RNA levels
that returned to control values within 7 days of growth under non-selective
conditions. Variant cells released from selection stress showed resistance to DNA
cleavage by doxorubicin, mitoxantrone, 4'-epidoxorubicin, 4'-deoxy-doxorubicin
but reduced resistance to aclacinomycin A and a 9-alkyl substituted anthracycline
in broad agreement with the cross-resistance patterns for cytotoxicity.
Mitoxantrone treated NCI-H69 cells were found to accumulate DNA-protein
crosslinks during a 4 hr post-treatment incubation period whereas variant cells
maintained depressed levels of crosslinking. There was no apparent abnormality in
the availability or drug sensitivity of topoisomerase II assayed in crude nuclear
extracts of NCI-H69/LX4 cells. Whole cell uptake of radiolabelled mitoxantrone
was depressed (50%) in NCI-H69/LX4 compared with NCI-H69, whereas assessment of
nuclear-bound drug in individual cells by a fluorescence quenching technique
showed at least a 10-fold greater level of target protection. The quenching
results provide evidence of a high affinity, saturable mode of drug binding,
favoured at low drug concentrations, that correlated with DNA cleavage capacity. 
We propose that the cytotoxic action of mitoxantrone is dependent upon a
restricted and persistent form of binding to DNA that favours the long-term or
progressive trapping of topoisomerase II complexes.

DOI: 10.1016/0006-2952(90)90237-f 
PMID: 2173600  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. EMBO J. 1990 Nov;9(11):3743-51.

Translational control by cytoplasmic polyadenylation during Xenopus oocyte
maturation: characterization of cis and trans elements and regulation by
cyclin/MPF.

McGrew LL(1), Richter JD.

Author information: 
(1)Worcester Foundation for Experimental Biology, Shrewsbury, MA 01545.

The expression of certain maternal mRNAs during oocyte maturation is regulated by
cytoplasmic polyadenylation. To understand this process, we have focused on a
maternal mRNA from Xenopus termed G10. This mRNA is stored in the cytoplasm of
stage 6 oocytes until maturation when the process of poly(A) elongation
stimulates its translation. Deletion analysis of the 3' untranslated region of
G10 RNA has revealed that two sequence elements, UUUUUUAU and AAUAAA were both
necessary and sufficient for polyadenylation and polysomal recruitment. In this
communication, we have defined the U-rich region that is optimal for
polyadenylation as UUUUUUAUAAAG, henceforth referred to as the cytoplasmic
polyadenylation element (CPE). We have also identified unique sequence
requirements in the 3' terminus of the RNA that can modulate polyadenylation even
in the presence of wild-type cis elements. A time course of cytoplasmic
polyadenylation in vivo shows that it is an early event of maturation and that it
requires protein synthesis within the first 15 min of exposure to progesterone.
MPF and cyclin can both induce polyadenylation but, at least with respect to MPF,
cannot obviate the requirement for protein synthesis. To identify factors that
may be responsible for maturation-specific polyadenylation, we employed extracts 
from oocytes and unfertilized eggs, the latter of which correctly polyadenylates 
exogenously added RNA. UV crosslinking demonstrated that an 82 kd protein binds
to the U-rich CPE in egg, but not oocyte, extracts. The data suggest that
progesterone, either in addition to or through MPF/cyclin, induces the synthesis 
of a factor during very early maturation that stimulates
polyadenylation.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)


PMCID: PMC552130
PMID: 2145153  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Nucleic Acids Res. 1990 Oct 25;18(20):5995-6001.

A 62,000 molecular weight spliceosome protein crosslinks to the intron
polypyrimidine tract.

Wang J(1), Pederson T.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Group, Worcester Foundation for Experimental Biology, Shrewsbury,
MA 01545, USA.

Incubation in HeLa nuclear extract of a 32P-labeled 61 nucleotide-long RNA
corresponding to the lariat branch site/polypyrimidine tract/3' splice site of
the first intron of human beta-globin pre-mRNA led to the crosslinking of a
single protein of approximately 62,000 mol. wt. (p62). p62 corresponds to a
polypyrimidine tract-binding protein recently described by Garcia-Blanco et al.
(Genes & Dev. 3: 1874-1886, 1989). Crosslinking of p62 to the 61 nt RNA was
highly sequence specific. No p62 crosslinking was observed with a 60 nt pGEM
vector RNA, a 63 nt RNA antisense to the 61-mer or a 72 nt U2 RNA sequence. p62
crosslinking to the 61 nt RNA was competed by unlabeled 61 nt RNA, by beta-globin
pre-mRNA containing intron 1, and by poly(U) and poly(C), but was competed to a
lesser extent or not at all by pGEM RNA, a beta-globin RNA lacking intron 1, or
poly(A). Experiments with mutated RNAs revealed that neither the lariat branch
site adenosine nor the 3' splice site were required for p62 crosslinking to
polypyrimidine tract-containing RNA. Elimination of the polypyrimidine tract
reduced p62 crosslinking, as did mutation of a polypyrimidine tract UU
dinucleotide to GA. However, replacement of a pyrimidine-rich tract immediately
adjacent (3') to the lariat branch site with a 57% A + G pGEM vector RNA sequence
also significantly reduced p62 crosslinking, indicating the involvement of both
this pyrimidine-rich region and the classical polypyrimidine tract adjacent to
the 3' splice site. The sites of protein interaction were further defined by
RNase H protection experiments, the results of which confirmed the patterns of
p62 crosslinking to mutant RNAs. p62 crosslinking was efficiently competed by a
DNA oligonucleotide having the same sequence as the 61 nt RNA, showing that p62
requires neither ribose 2' OH groups nor uracil bases for its interaction with
the polypyrimidine tract. p62 was not crosslinked to double-stranded 61 nt RNA.
Q-Sepharose chromatography of HeLa nuclear extract yielded an unbound fraction
(QU) in which p62 was the only polypyrimidine tract-crosslinkable protein and a
bound fraction (QB) in which, surprisingly, several non-p62 proteins were
crosslinkable to the polypyrimidine tract RNA. Yet, when the two Q-Sepharose
fractions were combined, p62 strongly out-competed the otherwise-crosslinkable QB
proteins for polypyrimidine tract RNA crosslinking. This indicates that p62 may
have the highest affinity and/or crosslinking efficiency for the intron
polypyrimidine tract of any HeLa nuclear protein.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/18.20.5995 
PMCID: PMC332396
PMID: 2172924  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Nucleic Acids Res. 1990 Oct 11;18(19):5817-21.

A 40 kilodalton rat liver nuclear protein binds specifically to apolipoprotein B 
mRNA around the RNA editing site.

Lau PP(1), Chen SH, Wang JC, Chan L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030.

Apolipoprotein (apo) B-48 mRNA is the product of RNA editing which consists of a 
C----U conversion changing a CAA codon encoding Gln-2153 in apoB-100 mRNA to a
UAA stop codon in apoB-48 mRNA. In the adult rat, RNA editing occurs both in the 
small intestine and the liver. We have studied the ability of rat liver nuclear
extracts to bind to synthetic apoB mRNA segments spanning the editing site. Using
an RNA gel mobility shift assay, we found the sequence-specific binding of a
protein(s) to a 65-nucleotide apoB-100 mRNA. UV crosslinking followed by T1
ribonuclease digestion and SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis demonstrated
the formation of a 40 kDa protein-RNA complex when 32P-labeled apoB-100 mRNA was 
incubated with a rat liver nuclear extract but not with HeLa nuclear extract.
Binding was specific for the sense strand of apoB mRNA, and was not demonstrated 
with single-stranded apoB DNA, or antisense apoB RNA. The complex also failed to 
form if SDS was present during the UV light exposure. Binding experiments using
synthetic apoB mRNAs indicate that the 40 kDa protein would also bind to apoB-48 
mRNA but not apoA-I, apoA-IV, apoC-II or apoE mRNA. Experiments using deletion
mutants of apoB-100 mRNA indicate efficient binding of wildtype 65-nucleotide
(W65), 40-nucleotide (W40) and 26-nucleotide (W26) apoB-100 mRNA segments, but
not 10-nucleotide (or smaller) segments of apoB-100 mRNA to the 40 kDa protein.
In contrast, two other regions of apoB-100 mRNA, B-5' (bases 1128-3003) and B-3' 
(bases 11310-11390), failed to bind to the protein. The 40 kDa sequence-specific 
binding protein in rat liver nuclear extract may play a role in apoB-100 mRNA
editing.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/18.19.5817 
PMCID: PMC332320
PMID: 2216773  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Nucleic Acids Res. 1990 Aug 25;18(16):4743-50.

Human transcription factor IIIC contains a polypeptide of 55 kDa specifically
binding to Pol III genes.

Schneider HR(1), Waldschmidt R, Seifart KH.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung, Marburg/Lahn, FRG.

Human transcription factor IIIC contains a 55 kDa polypeptide which specifically 
interacts with the Adenovirus 2 VAI gene promoter and which mimics most of the
DNA binding properties of the entire factor. The specificity and affinity of this
protein:DNA interaction was demonstrated by: (i) Separation of purified fractions
of hTFIIIC by SDS PAGE, electrotransfer to nitrocellulose, renaturation of
proteins and their subsequent binding to the VAI gene, (ii) recovery and
renaturation of proteins from SDS gels and identification of a fraction of
hTFIIIC with a molecular mass less than 68 kDa, which specifically binds to VAI
DNA, (iii) correlating the differential binding activity of the renatured 55 kDa 
component of hTFIIIC to mutated Pol III promoters with the ability of the entire 
factor to form functional transcription complexes thereon, and finally by (iv)
specific crosslinking of the 55 kDa DNA binding component of hTFIIIC to the
photoaffinity labeled B-box promoter sequence of the VAI gene.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/18.16.4743 
PMCID: PMC331934
PMID: 2395640  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Nucleic Acids Res. 1990 Aug 25;18(16):4727-36.

An undecamer DNA sequence directs termination of human ribosomal gene
transcription.

Pfleiderer C(1), Smid A, Bartsch I, Grummt I.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie, Würzburg, FRG.

Previously we have shown that a repetitive 18 bp sequence motif, the Sal box
(AGGTCGACCAGA/TT/ANTCCG), present in the 3' terminal spacer of mouse rDNA
constitutes a termination signal for RNA polymerase I (pol I). Similar sequence
elements which are functionally analogous to the murine terminator are present in
the spacer of human rDNA. However, the human termination signal is shorter
encompassing only 11 bp (GGGTCGACCAG) which correspond to the proximal part of
the mouse sequence. Two out of the five human Sal box elements are functionally
inactive due to natural point mutations which damage factor binding. A similar
sequence motif with a 10 of 11 base identity with the downstream terminators is
located upstream of the human transcription initiation site. The upstream element
interacts with the same factor(s) as the downstream terminators and is also
capable to stop elongating human RNA polymerase I. Despite the human and mouse
factors exert different electrophoretic mobilities in gel retardation assays,
UV-crosslinking and proteolytic clipping experiments indicate that both the sizes
and the tertiary structure of the Sal box binding proteins of both species are
very similar. When bound to DNA, both the human and the mouse factor terminate
transcription of pol I from the heterologous species. The results implicate that 
changes in signal sequences necessary for termination have been accompanied by
compensatory changes in the DNA binding domain of the protein(s) interacting with
the termination signal. In contrast, the protein-protein interactions between the
termination factor and the transcribing RNA polymerase I appear to have been
conserved during evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/18.16.4727 
PMCID: PMC331929
PMID: 2395639  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Anal Biochem. 1990 Jun;187(2):345-8.

S1-nuclease enhancement of the ethidium bromide binding assay of drug-induced DNA
interstrand crosslinking in human brain tumor cells.

Sriram R(1), Ali-Osman F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of Washington Medical Center,
Seattle 98195.

A modification, using S1-nuclease, of a simple and sensitive fluorometric assay
with ethidium bromide was developed for the measurement of cellular DNA
interstrand crosslinking induced by bifunctional alkylators. Cells are lysed and 
treated with proteinase K and sodium dodecyl sulfate followed by extensive
dialysis to yield intact high-molecular-weight DNA, free of contaminating
proteins, on which the crosslink assay is then performed. The assay depends on
the differential binding of ethidium bromide to single- and double-stranded DNA. 
Because of the higher ethidium bromide binding capacity of double-stranded DNA,
the fluorescence retained after a heating/cooling cycle is directly proportional 
to the drug-induced cellular DNA interstrand crosslinking. We demonstrate that
the sensitivity of this assay can be increased up to fourfold by including an
S1-nuclease digestion step. This modified technique is simple and suited to the
quantitation of low levels of DNA-interstrand crosslinking in cells.

DOI: 10.1016/0003-2697(90)90467-n 
PMID: 2200310  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1990 May;87(10):3866-70.

Transcriptional activation of a conserved sequence element by ras requires a
nuclear factor distinct from c-fos or c-jun.

Owen RD(1), Ostrowski MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, NC 27710.

The expression of transforming growth factor beta type 1 mRNA was increased by
conditional expression of ras. A 31-base-pair sequence found approximately 420
base pairs upstream of the gene encoding human transforming growth factor beta 1 
acted as a ras-responsive enhancer element in transient transfection assays. The 
human sequence contains the element TGACTCT that also is found in a murine
ras-responsive enhancer. Analysis of nuclear factors present in cells stably
transformed by ras indicated that both human and murine sequences were recognized
by the same nuclear factor. The role of fos and jun in ras transcriptional
activation was analyzed in transfection assays using murine elements that
contained either TGACTCT or TGAGTAA. These experiments showed that while both
elements are activated by fos/jun expression to nearly the same event, only the
former element responded to ras. In addition, activation of reporters containing 
TGACTCT is 6-fold higher by ras than by fos/jun. Gel retention experiments
revealed that the nuclear factor present in cells transformed by ras exhibited
the same sequence preference as demonstrated in the transient transfection
assays. UV-crosslinking experiments identify a protein of apparent molecular mass
120 kDa that recognizes the ras-responsive element. This work identifies a
persistent signal transduction pathway that links ras to nuclear transcription
and indicates that a 120-kDa protein is a target of this pathway.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.87.10.3866 
PMCID: PMC54004
PMID: 2111019  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Exp Med. 1990 Apr 1;171(4):1269-81.

Interleukin 2 induction of pore-forming protein gene expression in human
peripheral blood CD8+ T cells.

Smyth MJ(1), Ortaldo JR, Shinkai Y, Yagita H, Nakata M, Okumura K, Young HA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Immunology, National Cancer Institute-Frederick
Cancer Research Facility, Maryland 21701.

Our studies have analyzed pore-forming protein (PFP) mRNA expression in resting
and stimulated human peripheral blood CD3- large granular lymphocytes (LGL), CD3+
T cells, and their CD4+ or CD8+ subsets. Signals that stimulate T cells to
develop cytotoxic activity (i.e., IL-2 or OKT-3 mAb) led to the induction of PFP 
mRNA in T cells. The data indicated that IL-2 directly increased PFP mRNA in the 
CD8+ subset of T cells, in the absence of new DNA or protein synthesis.
Abrogation of IL-2-induced PFP mRNA expression and cytotoxic potential of T cells
by the anti-p75 IL-2 receptor mAb suggested that low numbers of p75 IL-2
receptors on CD8+ T cells were capable of transducing signals responsible for
these IL-2-induced effects. The induction of T cell PFP mRNA via CD3, using OKT-3
mAb, was less rapid but greater than that caused by IL-2; however, a combination 
of PMA and ionomycin, which bypasses crosslinking of the TCR/CD3 complex, could
not mimic this increase in PFP mRNA levels in T cells. The role of second
messenger systems in regulating PFP mRNA expression remains to be determined. In 
contrast, high constitutive PFP mRNA expression was observed in CD3- LGL and
these mRNA levels could not be enhanced by stimulation with IL-2. The cytotoxic
potential of peripheral blood T cells and LGL induced in response to IL-2
correlated with IL-2-induced PFP mRNA levels in these cells and was consistent
with PFP being one of several important molecules involved in the effector
function of cytotoxic lymphocytes.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.171.4.1269 
PMCID: PMC2187847
PMID: 1691263  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


16. FEBS Lett. 1990 Feb 26;261(2):353-7.

The formyl peptide chemoattractant receptor is encoded by a 2 kilobase messenger 
RNA. Expression in Xenopus oocytes.

Murphy PM(1), Gallin EK, Tiffany HL, Malech HL.

Author information: 
(1)Bacterial Diseases Section, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892.

Activation of the formyl peptide chemoattractant receptor (FPCR) of phagocytic
cells mobilizes intracellular calcium stores and affects the plasma membrane
potential. Affinity crosslinking of FPCR has demonstrated a 60-80 kDa
glycoprotein, with core peptide of 32 kDa. It is not known whether functional
FPCR is this single peptide or requires multiple subunits. We used Xenopus oocyte
expression system to determine the size of mRNA required for synthesis of
functional FPCR. Injection of oocytes with poly(A)+ RNA from HL60 cells
differentiated to the granulocyte phenotype resulted in acquisition of formyl
peptide-specific responses (inward transmembrane current with a reversal
potential consistent with a chloride conductance, and calcium efflux). FPCR
activity expressed in oocytes had a ligand concentration dependence, ligand
structure dependence and pertussis toxin sensitivity similar to those reported in
phagocytic cells. When RNA was size fractionated, a single peak of FPCR activity 
at 2 kilobases was observed after injection of mRNA into oocytes. Our data
strongly suggest that FPCR is composed of a single-sized polypeptide.

DOI: 10.1016/0014-5793(90)80590-f 
PMID: 1690150  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Anal Biochem. 1990 Feb 15;185(1):103-7.

An electrophoretic method for the purification of RNA regions involved in protein
crosslinking.

Hajnsdorf E(1), Expert-Bezançon A.

Author information: 
(1)Groupe de Photobiologie Moléculaire, Institut Jacques Monod, CNRS-Université
Paris, France.

Direct information about structural interactions in ribonucleoprotein complexes
can be obtained from crosslinking data. The purification of specific complexes,
i.e., their separation from noncrosslinked proteins, from free RNA, and from
other complexes, is essential for the identification of the bound proteins and
the precise localization of their attachment sites in RNA. We describe a
two-dimensional denaturing gel system which achieves this purification; in the
first dimension basic proteins do not enter the gel and RNA--protein complexes
are slowed down compared to protein free RNA, and in the second dimension sodium 
dodecyl sulfate improves the separation between the different complexes on the
basis of their protein content.

DOI: 10.1016/0003-2697(90)90262-8 
PMID: 1693045  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1990 Feb;87(3):955-9.

Molecular cloning of human protein 4.2: a major component of the erythrocyte
membrane.

Sung LA(1), Chien S, Chang LS, Lambert K, Bliss SA, Bouhassira EE, Nagel RL,
Schwartz RS, Rybicki AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Mechanics, University of California at San Diego, La
Jolla 92093.

Protein 4.2 (P4.2) comprises approximately 5% of the protein mass of human
erythrocyte (RBC) membranes. Anemia occurs in patients with RBCs deficient in
P4.2, suggesting a role for this protein in maintaining RBC stability and
integrity. We now report the molecular cloning and characterization of human RBC 
P4.2 cDNAs. By immunoscreening a human reticulocyte cDNA library and by using the
polymerase chain reaction, two cDNA sequences of 2.4 and 2.5 kilobases (kb) were 
obtained. These cDNAs differ only by a 90-base-pair insert in the longer isoform 
located three codons downstream from the putative initiation site. The 2.4- and
2.5-kb cDNAs predict proteins of approximately 77 and approximately 80 kDa,
respectively, and the authenticity was confirmed by sequence identity with 46
amino acids of three cyanogen bromide-cleaved peptides of P4.2. Northern blot
analysis detected a major 2.4-kb RNA species in reticulocytes. Isolation of two
P4.2 cDNAs implies existence of specific regulation of P4.2 expression in human
RBCs. Human RBC P4.2 has significant homology with human factor XIII subunit a
and guinea pig liver transglutaminase. Sequence alignment of P4.2 with these two 
transglutaminases, however, revealed that P4.2 lacks the critical cysteine
residue required for the enzymatic crosslinking of substrates.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.87.3.955 
PMCID: PMC53388
PMID: 1689063  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Arch Virol. 1990;114(1-2):65-73.

Characterization of a temperature-sensitive mutant in the RNA polymerase PB2
subunit gene of influenza A/WSN/33 virus.

Yamanaka K(1), Ogasawara N, Ueda M, Yoshikawa H, Ishihama A, Nagata K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, School of Medicine, Osaka University, Japan.

The temperature-sensitive mutant ts-1 of influenza virus A/WSN/33 carries
mutations in the gene encoding RNA polymerase PB2 subunit. Effect of temperature 
on various steps of viral RNA synthesis was examined using disrupted virions of
ts-1 mutant. The initiation of RNA synthesis with dinucleotide ApG primer was not
affected by elevated temperature, whereas that with primer RNA containing
5'-terminal cap-1 structure was temperature-sensitive. The result supports the
previous notion deduced from the UV-crosslinking experiments, that PB2 is
involved in the cap-1 dependent initiation of RNA synthesis. In addition, the
ts-1 mutant showed a defect in RNA chain elongation. Nucleotide sequence analysis
of RNA segment 1 of ts-1 mutant revealed that the amino acid number 417 is
essential for the recognition of cap-1 structures and/or the interaction with
catalytic unit of the RNA polymerase.

DOI: 10.1007/bf01311012 
PMID: 2222191  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Cancer Commun. 1990;2(1):7-12.

Uptake and binding of 3'-(3-cyano-4-morpholinyl)-3'-deaminoadriamycin and
3'-(4-morpholinyl)-3'-deaminoadriamycin in L5178Y lymphoblasts in vitro.

Begleiter A(1), Jesson MI, Johnston JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada.

3'-(3-Cyano-4-morpholinyl)-3'-deaminoadriamycin (CMA) and
3'-(4-morpholinyl)-3'-deaminoadriamycin (MA) are analogues of Adriamycin, with
altered cytotoxic activity. CMA is 100- to 1500-fold more cytotoxic than
Adriamycin and possesses unique DNA crosslinking activity. Intact MA does not
crosslink DNA and has a cytotoxicity equivalent to Adriamycin, but it retains its
activity in anthracycline-resistant cells. In this study, uptake and binding of
[3H]CMA and [3H]MA in L5178Y lymphoblasts were examined. Both CMA and MA were
rapidly taken up by cells at 37 degrees C and concentrated almost exclusively in 
the nucleus. All of the intracellular MA was TCA-soluble, but only 45% of this
drug effluxed from the cells by 4 hr. More than 50% of CMA in the cells was
TCA-insoluble, and approximately 40% effluxed from the cells by 4 hr through loss
of the TCA-soluble fraction. CMA differed from other alkylating agents in that
more than 97% of the bound drug was associated with DNA. The bound drug was
partially lost from the DNA by a process that may have involved DNA repair.


PMID: 2196074  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Biochimie. 1989 Jul;71(7):839-52.

Crosslinking of ribosomal proteins S4, S5, S7, S8, S11, S12 and S18 to domains 1 
and 2 of 16S rRNA in the Escherichia coli 30S particle.

Chiaruttini C(1), Milet M, Hayes DH, Expert-Bezancon A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Chimie Cellulaire, Institut de Biologie Physico-chimique,
Paris, France.

RNA-protein crosslinks were introduced into Escherichia coli 30S ribosomal
subunits by treatment with 1-ethyl-3(3-dimethylaminopropyl)carbodiimide (EDC).
Complexes of 16S rRNA cross-linked to 30S ribosomal proteins were isolated and
hybridized with a series of single-stranded bacteriophage M13-rDNA probes. These 
probes, each carrying an inserted rDNA fragment, were used to select contiguous
16S rRNA sections covering all of domain 1 and the major part of domain 2
(starting at the 5'-P terminus and ending at nucleotide 869) and the proteins
covalently linked to each of these sections were identified by 2-dimensional
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. This procedure identified proteins S4, S5,
S7, S8, S11, S12, and S18 as the species most efficiently crosslinked to domains 
1 and 2 of 16S rRNA. These results are discussed in the light of current
knowledge of the tertiary structure of 16S rRNA in the E. coli 30S ribosomal
subunit.

DOI: 10.1016/0300-9084(89)90048-5 
PMID: 2505863  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1989 May 10;1011(2-3):183-91.

Particulate untransformed glucocorticoid-receptor complexes from HeLa cells
crosslinked in vivo.

Rossini GP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Chimica Biologica, Università di Modena, Italy.

When control HeLa cells were incubated at 2 degrees C in the presence of
tritiated dexamethasone, most glucocorticoid-receptor complexes were found in
cytosolic extracts as untransformed forms. Chemical crosslinking of intact HeLa
cells resulted in the immobilization of 50% of the total cellular
glucocorticoid-receptor complexes in the nuclear fraction. Under these conditions
the redistribution of total protein, RNA and lactate dehydrogenase activity
between cytosol and nuclei was negligible, indicating that glucocorticoid binding
in the nuclear fraction was not due to a methodological artifact. High levels of 
glucocorticoid receptor were also found in the nuclear fraction of crosslinked
cells which were not exposed to glucocorticoids. Nuclear receptor complexes could
be released in soluble forms by DNase I and sonication. Evaluations of DNA
binding and ionic properties of glucocorticoid receptors prepared from control
and crosslinked cells maintained at 2 degrees C revealed that most of the
hormone-receptor complex in cytosols and nuclear extracts behaved as
untransformed forms. As opposed to glucocorticoid receptors prepared from control
cells, heat treatment of extracts obtained from crosslinked cells did not result 
in increased DNA binding and changes in ionic properties of receptor complexes. I
conclude that untransformed glucocorticoid receptors are present in both cytosol 
and nuclei of intact cells.

DOI: 10.1016/0167-4889(89)90208-5 
PMID: 2713403  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Mutat Res. 1989 May;217(3):185-92.

Repair analysis of mitomycin C-induced DNA crosslinking in ribosomal RNA genes in
lymphoblastoid cells from Fanconi's anemia patients.

Matsumoto A(1), Vos JM, Hanawalt PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Stanford University, CA 94305-5020.

The repair of mitomycin C (MMC)-induced DNA crosslinking was analyzed by
denaturation-renaturation gel electrophoresis in ribosomal RNA genes in
lymphoblastoid cell lines from 4 patients with Fanconi's anemia (FA). In
comparison to normal lymphoblastoid cell lines, 2 lines of FA cells belonging to 
complementation group A clearly exhibited higher sensitivity to MMC and an almost
identical deficiency in the removal of DNA crosslinking. A complementation group 
B cell line, HSC 62, exhibited a lower sensitivity than group A cells and a
lesser deficiency in crosslink repair. Another 'non-A' group cell line, HSC 230, 
reproducibly exhibited even higher sensitivity to MMC than group A cells. The
results on MMC crosslinkage removal at the molecular level correlated well with
cell survival. The observed subtle differences of repair among the 4 FA cell
lines might represent possible genetic differences in the respective FA
complementation groups.

DOI: 10.1016/0921-8777(89)90070-0 
PMID: 2497343  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


24. EMBO J. 1989 Apr;8(4):1139-44.

A gamma-interferon-induced factor that binds the interferon response sequence of 
the MHC class I gene, H-2Kb.

Blanar MA(1), Baldwin AS Jr, Flavell RA, Sharp PA.

Author information: 
(1)Biogen Research Corporation, Cambridge, MA 02142.

Transcription of class I genes of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) can 
be induced by interferons. Treatment of HeLa cells with interferon-gamma induces 
a DNA-binding factor, IBP-1, specific for a site within the interferon response
sequence (IRS) of the H-2Kb promoter. The mol. wt of IBP-1, as estimated by
photoactivated protein-DNA crosslinking analysis, is approximately 59 kd.
Point-mutation of this binding site abolishes IBP-1 interaction and the ability
of the MHC promoter to respond to interferon. Induction of this binding activity 
is rapid and closely parallels the previously reported time course of
transcriptional activation of endogenous MHC class I genes. Treatment of cells
with cycloheximide, a protein synthesis inhibitor, blocked the induction of the
DNA-binding activity. An oligonucleotide derived from the virus- and
double-stranded RNA-inducible promoter of the interferon-beta 1 gene is able to
bind IBP-1. Sequences similar to the IBP-1 binding site are found upstream of
many interferon-responsive genes.


PMCID: PMC400925
PMID: 2501084  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Nucleic Acids Res. 1989 Mar 25;17(6):2233-44.

Ribonucleoprotein SS-B/La belongs to a protein family with consensus sequences
for RNA-binding.

Chan EK(1), Sullivan KF, Tan EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, Scripps Clinic and Research
Foundation, La Jolla, CA 92037.

Autoantibodies from systemic rheumatic disorders have become useful reagents in
molecular biology. SS-B/La, a major target of autoantibodies in lupus and
Sjogren's syndrome, has been identified as a 46 kDa protein component of a
ribonucleoprotein (RNP) particle implicated in the maturation of RNA polymerase
III transcripts. This report describes the complete sequences of human and bovine
SS-B/La and the identification of RNA-binding protein consensus sequences RNP1
and RNP2 in the N-terminal region previously shown to be complexed with RNA in
UV-crosslinking experiments. Segments of about 95 residues from the RNA-binding
domain of SS-B/La and from 29 RNA-binding domains of several other proteins are
analysed with respect to the frequency of amino acids and their hydrophobicity at
each position. The data suggest that SS-B/La belongs to a large family of
RNA-binding proteins which includes heterogeneous nuclear RNPs, nucleolin, mRNA
polyadenylate binding protein, and small nuclear RNPs.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/17.6.2233 
PMCID: PMC317593
PMID: 2468131  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Science. 1989 Feb 3;243(4891):649-52.

An ultraviolet-sensitive RNA structural element in a viroid-like domain of the
hepatitis delta virus.

Branch AD(1), Benenfeld BJ, Baroudy BM, Wells FV, Gerin JL, Robertson HD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10021.

The RNA genome of the hepatitis delta virus (HDV) appears to be made up of two
parts: a small domain with a high degree of sequence conservation and structural 
features likely to promote replication; plus a second, larger domain that is less
conserved and encodes the delta antigen. This report focuses on one of the
several sets of data that have led to the proposal of this model: the existence
of a novel structural element in HDV genomic RNA. This structural element lies
within the highly conserved domain of HDV RNA and may be related to the local
tertiary structure previously mapped to the central conserved region of the plant
viroid genome. Both elements occur in regions with no apparent coding capacity
and are distinctively responsive to ultraviolet (UV) light. Transcripts
containing partial and full-length genomic sequences of HDV readily undergo a
UV-induced crosslinking reaction, which establishes a covalent bond between two
noncontiguous segments. By locking two segments of the overall structure into
place, this crosslink has permitted the unbranched, rodlike model of HDV RNA to
be examined and confirmed in the portion of the RNA analyzed. The clustering of
the novel tertiary structure and the recently discovered self-cleavage sites into
a highly conserved, but apparently noncoding, portion of the genome defines a
viroid-like domain in HDV RNA and raises questions about the possible events
leading up to the association of free-living RNAs with messenger RNAs and other
RNA molecules.

DOI: 10.1126/science.2492676 
PMID: 2492676  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1989 Feb;86(4):1333-7.

CD28 activation pathway regulates the production of multiple T-cell-derived
lymphokines/cytokines.

Thompson CB(1), Lindsten T, Ledbetter JA, Kunkel SL, Young HA, Emerson SG, Leiden
JM, June CH.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor 48109.

CD28 is a 44-kDa glycoprotein expressed as a homodimer on the surface of a major 
subset of human T cells. Previous studies have demonstrated that the binding of
monoclonal antibodies to the CD28 surface antigen can augment the proliferation
of purified human T cells stimulated with suboptimal doses of mitogens or
anti-T-cell receptor/CD3 complex antibodies. In this report, we show that CD28
stimulation augments T-cell immune responses by specifically inducing a 5- to
50-fold enhancement in the expression and secretion of interleukin 2, tumor
necrosis factor type alpha, lymphotoxin, interferon gamma, and
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor in normal human T cells
stimulated to proliferate by crosslinking of the T-cell receptor/CD3 complex.
This CD28-mediated induction of lymphokine/cytokine gene expression occurred even
in T cells stimulated with optimal concentrations of mitogens or anti-T-cell
receptor/CD3 antibodies, although under these conditions CD28 activation failed
to enhance the proliferative response. The activation pathway induced by
stimulation of CD28 is distinct from other biochemical pathways that induce
lymphokines/cytokines because CD28 stimulation can induce lymphokine/cytokine
gene expression in the presence of the immunosuppressant cyclosporine. Together
these data suggest that the CD28 cell surface molecule is part of a distinct
activation pathway that specifically modulates the expression of multiple
lymphokine/cytokine genes.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.86.4.1333 
PMCID: PMC286684
PMID: 2465550  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Cell Immunol. 1989 Jan;118(1):53-67.

Early activation and cell cycle entry of resting B cells after Fab-anti-Ig
treatment: role of receptor crosslinking.

Lagoo A(1), Sell S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Texas Health
Science Center, Houston 77025.

Comparison of the effect of goat anti-rabbit Ig (GARIg) and its monovalent
fragment (Fab-GARIg) demonstrates that surface Ig (sIg) crosslinking is not
necessary to effect G0 to G1 transition in rabbit peripheral blood B cells but is
required for induction of DNA synthesis. Five micrograms per milliliter or more
of GARIg is sufficient to induce DNA synthesis but up to 50 micrograms/ml of
Fab-GARIg is not. However, the monovalent reagent induces microscopically
observable cytoplasmic and nuclear changes (blast transformation) in a
dose-dependent manner. These differ qualitatively and quantitatively from the
morphological changes seen with comparable doses of GARIg; Fab anti-Ig produces
"small blasts" whereas complete GARIg induces large blasts. The monovalent
reagent, in a wide range of concentrations, is as effective as the complete
antibody in modulating sIg from rabbit B cells. Fab-GARIg treatment modulates sIg
in a biphasic manner. It clears the high-density sIg within 5 min, whereas the
remaining low-density receptors disappear after 4 hr. Cytosolic protein kinase C 
levels decline equally after treatment with either Fab-GARIg or whole anti-Ig.
RNA synthesis, as measured by [3H]uridine incorporation, increases for the first 
12 hr in cells activated with either reagent. It declines to basal levels in
Fab-GARIg stimulated cells, but a continuous increase occurs in cells stimulated 
with 5 and 50 micrograms/ml of complete antibody. Simultaneous addition of 50
micrograms/ml Fab-GARIg with 5 microgram/ml of GARIg causes greater RNA synthesis
for 12 hr after stimulation than is caused by GARIg alone. After 12 hr the
monovalent reagent has an inhibitory effect on RNA synthesis.
Fluorescence-activated cell sorter analysis of acridine orange-stained cells
shows that Fab anti-Ig-stimulated cells have higher RNA content than resting
cells, but lower than GARIg-activated cells. These findings suggest that rabbit B
cells can be activated from the G0 stage of cell cycle to G1 by monovalent
anti-Ig reagents but further cell cycle progression requires maintenance signals 
provided by receptor crosslinking. The implications of these results for B cell
activation signalling are discussed in the context of the floating receptor
model.

DOI: 10.1016/0008-8749(89)90357-2 
PMID: 2463097  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Nucleic Acids Res. 1988 Nov 25;16(22):10681-97.

Interaction of psoralen-derivatized oligodeoxyribonucleoside methylphosphonates
with synthetic DNA containing a promoter for T7 RNA polymerase.

Lee BL(1), Blake KR, Miller PS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biophysics, School of Hygiene and Public Health, Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, MD 21205.

The interaction of
4'-N(2-aminoethyl)aminomethyl-4,5',8-trimethylpsoralen-modified oligonucleoside
methylphosphonates with synthetic ds-DNA containing a T7 RNA polymerase promoter 
was studied. The oligomers effectively crosslinked with either coding or
noncoding ss-DNA when irradiated at 365 nm, but not with ds-DNA. The extent of
the crosslinking reaction, which was complete within 16 min: (a) reached its
maximum at an oligomer concentration of 3 microM; (b) remained constant below the
Tm of the duplex and then rapidly decreased; and (c) appeared to depend upon the 
sequence surrounding the psoralen crosslinking site. An oligomer crosslinked to
the template strand inhibited transcription by T7 RNA polymerase whereas an
oligomer crosslinked to the non-template strand had only a small inhibitory
effect. Oligomers did not crosslink to ds-DNA undergoing transcription nor did
they inhibit the transcription reaction.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/16.22.10681 
PMCID: PMC338933
PMID: 3060847  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 1988 Nov;31(2):183-98.

Identification and localisation of the products of a putative eggshell precursor 
gene in the vitellarium of Schistosoma mansoni.

Köster B(1), Dargatz H, Schröder J, Hirzmann J, Haarmann C, Symmons P, Kunz W.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Genetik, Universität Düsseldorf, F.R.G.

An abundant 0.9 kb female-specific mRNA in Schistosoma mansoni is thought to code
for an egg-shell precursor protein [Bobek et al. (1986) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 83, 5544-5548]. This gene contains two ORFs. A recombinant plasmid was
constructed that expresses a fusion protein containing a glycine- and
tyrosine-rich polypeptide coded for by one of these ORFs. Antisera raised against
homogenates of female, but not of male, S. mansoni recognise this fusion protein,
providing direct evidence that this ORF is used by S. mansoni. In comparative
Western blots of S. mansoni homogenates from males and females affinity purified 
antibodies that react with the fusion protein react exclusively with proteins
from females, recognising a 28 kDa polypeptide and a smear of immunoreactive
material probably caused by oxidative crosslinking. In immunohistology, the
affinity purified antibodies react with mature vitelline cells in female
schistosomes. The immunoreactive material is localised in the so-called
'vitelline droplets' that are morphologically very similar to 'shell globules',
known to contain egg-shell precursors, that are found in Fasciola hepatica. In
situ hybridisation shows that the eggshell precursor gene is only transcribed in 
immature vitelline cells and has a short half-life. Taken together, these
observations provide persuasive evidence that the 0.9 kb mRNA codes for an
eggshell precursor.

DOI: 10.1016/0166-6851(88)90169-7 
PMID: 2847044  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Clin Invest. 1988 Nov;82(5):1787-92.

Interleukin 1 binds to specific receptors on human keratinocytes and induces
granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor mRNA and protein. A potential
autocrine role for interleukin 1 in epidermis.

Kupper TS(1), Lee F, Birchall N, Clark S, Dower S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06510.

Cultured human keratinocytes have been shown to produce IL-1 alpha and beta mRNA 
and protein. IL-1 biological activity has been identified in normal human
epidermis; in vitro, most biologically active IL-1 resides in a cell-associated
compartment. The potential for autocrine effects of IL-1 on human keratinocytes
was assessed by measurement of keratinocyte IL-1 receptors. Both high- and
low-affinity cell surface receptors that bound recombinant (r) IL-1 alpha and
beta with comparable affinities could be identified on cultured human
keratinocytes, using 125I-labeled rIL-1. Chemical crosslinking experiments
identified a cell surface molecule of roughly 72,500 Mr that bound 125I-labeled
IL-1, similar to the molecular weight of previously described IL-1 receptors on
fibroblasts, B cells, and T cells. To assess the biological consequences of
keratinocyte IL-1 binding, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor
(GM-CSF) gene expression was measured. The addition of exogenous rIL-1 alpha led 
to a dose-dependent increase in the accumulation of GM-CSF mRNA, as measured by a
sensitive and specific S1 nuclease assay. This increase in mRNA was reflected in 
a marked increase in GM-CSF biological activity as measured by proliferation of
blast cells from chronic myelogenous leukemia patients. The biological activity
was completely inhibitable by an antibody to human rGM-CSF. GM-CSF activates
mature neutrophils and macrophages and appears to enhance the efficiency of
Langerhans cell antigen presentation to T cells. Release of IL-1 from injured or 
activated keratinocytes may lead to enhanced epidermal GM-CSF gene expression via
an autocrine mechanism, thus enhancing local host defense.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI113792 
PMCID: PMC442749
PMID: 2460504  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Carcinogenesis. 1988 Oct;9(10):1733-8.

Chemical specificity for induction of stress response genes by DNA-damaging drugs
in human adenocarcinoma cells.

Schaefer EL(1), Morimoto RI, Theodorakis NG, Seidenfeld J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Northwestern University Medical School, Chicago,
IL 60611.

We investigated the induction of a stress response gene by anticancer drugs that 
damage and covalently modify DNA and other cellular macromolecules. Two human
colon adenocarcinoma cell lines (HT-29 and BE) which differ in sensitivity to
chloroethylnitrosoureas were treated with 1,3-bis-(2-chloroethyl)-1-nitrosourea
(BCNU) or with 1-(2-chloroethyl)-3-cyclohexyl-1-nitrosourea (CCNU). Both of these
drugs can alkylate, crosslink and carbamoylate cellular macromolecules. Treated
cells were compared to controls for cytoplasmic levels of HSP70 RNA and for
synthesis of heat shock proteins. We also tested for induction of stress response
gene expression by equitoxic or greater concentrations of other nitrosourea
analogues which can alkylate only, alkylate and crosslink only or carbamoylate
only, as well as other DNA crosslinking agents (chlorambucil and cis-platinum).
Of these, only BCNU and CCNU, the chloroethylnitrosoureas having all three of the
macromolecule-modifying activities, strongly induce HSP70 RNA levels in a
dose-dependent and time-dependent manner. Induction of HSP70 by BCNU occurred in 
both cell lines at dose ranges that were cytocidal to the BCNU-resistant HT-29
cells. No induction was seen in BE cells at the lower BCNU concentrations that
were equitoxic to that more sensitive cell line. These observations suggest that 
induction of HSP70 by BCNU and CCNU is neither a direct consequence of DNA
crosslinks nor an invariable result of cytocidal drugs.

DOI: 10.1093/carcin/9.10.1733 
PMID: 3168151  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Anal Biochem. 1988 Oct;174(1):215-23.

Use of reverse transcription to determine the exact locations of psoralen
photochemical crosslinks in RNA.

Ericson G(1), Wollenzien P.

Author information: 
(1)E.A. Doisy Department of Biochemistry, St. Louis University Medical Center,
Missouri 63104.

We have studied the properties of avian myeloblastosis virus reverse
transcriptase on Escherichia coli 16S ribosomal RNA that was known to contain a
psoralen crosslink in a restricted region around residue 920. These crosslinked
RNA molecules were purified on the basis of loop size by gel electrophoresis.
Reverse transcription stopped at specific positions in the crosslinked molecules 
but not in control linear molecules. With the particular crosslink that was
studied, at the earliest time of reverse transcription, the most frequent
stopping site was G925. At later times two nearly equal stops at G925 and C924
were seen. The crosslinked site was an absolute stop since even at long times of 
incubation the reverse transcriptase was not able to proceed beyond G925/C924. An
independent determination of the crosslinked site by directly sequencing a
section of the crosslinked RNA indicated that C924 was the sole nucleotide
involved in the crosslink. Therefore, reverse transcriptase was able to
synthesize cDNA all the way up to and including the nucleotide that contained the
psoralen crosslink. Thus, reverse transcription can be a rapid and precise method
for determining psoralen crosslinking sites when prefractionated, crosslinked RNA
templates are used.

DOI: 10.1016/0003-2697(88)90538-6 
PMID: 2464291  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Virology. 1988 Aug;165(2):438-45.

Role of the adenovirus 72-kDa DNA binding protein in the rapid decay of early
viral mRNA.

Lazaridis I(1), Babich A, Nevins JR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Rockefeller University, New York, New York
10021.

Previous experiments have shown that the early adenovirus E1A and E1B mRNAs decay
with a half-life of 20 min in a lytic infection dependent on the action of the
viral 72-kDa DNA binding protein. In contrast, the same E1A and E1B mRNAs are
stable when synthesized in 293 cells, an adenovirus-transformed cell line that is
devoid of the 72-kDa protein. If 293 cells are infected with the E1A deletion
mutant dl312, the endogenous E1A RNA disappears after 4 hr of infection, a time
coincident with the appearance of the 72-kDa protein. The induction of decay is
specific since there is no decrease in the level of actin or certain other
cellular mRNAs. Thus, the stability of the early RNAs is variable and correlates 
with the presence of the 72-kDa protein. An interaction of the 72-kDa DNA binding
protein with RNA inside the cell has been demonstrated by in vivo crosslinking of
protein to RNA. However, the protein is found in association with actin mRNA as
well as E1A mRNA. Thus, although the 72-kDa protein appears to be required for
the rapid decay of viral mRNA it apparently does not impart specificity to the
process.

DOI: 10.1016/0042-6822(88)90587-9 
PMID: 2970153  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Nucleic Acids Res. 1988 Jul 25;16(14B):7013-24.

Analysis of the psoralen-crosslinking pattern in chromatin DNA by exonuclease
digestion.

Widmer RM(1), Koller T, Sogo JM.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie, Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule, ETHZ, Zürich,
Switzerland.

When chromatin is photoreacted with psoralen, crosslinks occur preferentially in 
the linker DNA between nucleosomes. The pattern of these crosslinks can be
analysed by exonuclease digestion of random DNA fragments, since the exonucleases
tested stop at sites of psoralen-crosslinks. Further digestion of these fragments
with S1-nuclease leads to DNA fragments of nucleosomal and polynucleosomal size, 
which presumably carry psoralen-crosslinks at both ends. This method of analysis 
of chromatin structure complements the classical micrococcal nuclease digestion
analysis, since it can be performed in vitro as well as in vivo, and since it is 
independent of pH and ionic conditions.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/16.14.7013 
PMCID: PMC338348
PMID: 2841647  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Cell. 1988 Jun 17;53(6):937-47.

Mapping protein-DNA interactions in vivo with formaldehyde: evidence that histone
H4 is retained on a highly transcribed gene.

Solomon MJ(1), Larsen PL, Varshavsky A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge 02139.

We have used formaldehyde-mediated protein-DNA crosslinking within intact cells
to examine the in vivo chromatin structure of the D. melanogaster heat shock
protein 70 (hsp70) genes. In agreement with previous in vitro studies, we find
that the heat shock-mediated transcriptional induction of the hsp70 genes
perturbs their chromatin structure, resulting in fewer protein-DNA contacts
crosslinkable in vivo by formaldehyde. However, contrary to earlier in vitro
evidence that histones may be absent from actively transcribed genes, we show
directly, by immunoprecipitation of in vivo-crosslinked chromatin fragments, that
at least histone H4 remains bound to hsp70 DNA in vivo, irrespective of its rate 
of transcription. The formaldehyde-based in vivo mapping techniques described in 
this work are generally applicable, and can be used both to probe protein-DNA
interactions within specific genes and to determine the genomic location of
specific chromosomal proteins.

DOI: 10.1016/s0092-8674(88)90469-2 
PMID: 2454748  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1988 Jun;85(12):4138-42.

Cooperative DNA binding of heterologous proteins: evidence for contact between
the cyclic AMP receptor protein and RNA polymerase.

Ren YL(1), Garges S, Adhya S, Krakow JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Hunter College, City University of New
York, NY 10021.

Four cAMP-independent receptor protein mutants (designated CRP* mutants) isolated
previously are able to activate in vivo gene transcription in the absence of cAMP
and their activity can be enhanced by cAMP or cGMP. One of the four mutant
proteins, CRP*598 (Arg-142 to His, Ala-144 to Thr), has been characterized with
regard to its conformational properties and ability to bind to and support
abortive initiation from the lac promoter. In the absence of cGMP, CRP*598 shows 
a more open conformation than CRP, as indicated by its sensitivity to proteolytic
attack and 5,5'-dithiobis(2-nitrobenzoic acid)-mediated subunit crosslinking.
Binding of wild-type CRP to its site on the lac promoter and activation of
abortive initiation by RNA polymerase on this promoter are effected by cAMP but
not by cGMP. CRP*598 can activate lacP+-directed abortive initiation in the
presence of cAMP and less efficiently in the presence of cGMP or in the absence
of cyclic nucleotide. DNase I protection ("foot-printing") indicates that
cAMP-CRP* binds to its site on the lac promoter whereas unliganded CRP* and
cGMP-CRP* form a stable complex with the [32P]lacP+ fragment only in the presence
of RNA polymerase, showing cooperative binding of two heterologous proteins. This
cooperative binding provides strong evidence for a contact between CRP and RNA
polymerase for activation of transcription. Although cGMP binds to CRP, it cannot
replace cAMP in effecting the requisite conformational transition necessary for
site-specific promoter binding. In contrast, the weakly active unliganded CRP*598
can be shifted to a functional state not only by cAMP but also by cGMP and RNA
polymerase.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.85.12.4138 
PMCID: PMC280381
PMID: 2837757  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Mol Biol. 1988 May 20;201(2):339-51.

Interstrand crosslinks due to 4,5',8-trimethylpsoralen and near ultraviolet light
in specific sequences of animal DNA. Effect of constitutive chromatin structure
and of induced transcription.

Ross PM(1), Yu HS.

Author information: 
(1)Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10021.

We have used low-level photocrosslinkage to study chromatin effects on psoralen
intercalation at specific DNA sequences of various complexities in intact,
cultured, Drosophila cells. Alkali-denatured DNA connected in both strands to a
4,5',8-trimethylpsoralen (TMP) interstrand crosslink is insensitive to digestion 
by the single strand-specific nuclease S1 and does not hybridize to complementary
DNA. Crosslink number at any ultraviolet light exposure increases in proportion
to the concentration [PS] of TMP dark binding sites that are occupied. The
crosslinking constant, K, is the increase in crosslink number per length DNA per 
increment [PS]. Many factors influence K, including sequence composition and
ionic strength. We show here that the ratio of K at any specific sequence (Kh,
from hybridization measurements) to Kh at any other specific sequence or to K of 
total DNA (Kf, from fluorimetry measurements) can be calculated from measurements
of crosslinkage, the mass fraction of the sequence in question or of total DNA
that is connected in both strands to a crosslink. When crosslinked and
uncrosslinked DNAs fragmented by mechanical shear were mixed in known
proportions, Kf exceeded Kh of a single-copy gene by 15%. We treated cells with
TMP plus near ultraviolet light, then tested for crosslinkage and for
hybridization. A single-copy, larval gene at 70D, and a 250-copy type 1 ribosomal
DNA intervening sequence, neither of which is transcribed in these cells, were as
sensitive to crosslinkage as total, cell DNA. However, single-copy, heat shock
gene sequences from loci 63BC and 95D, and the 180-copy ribosomal DNA coding
sequence were more sensitive to crosslinkage than total DNA in the same
preparations. The excess was largest in the shortest fragments, indicating a
localized effect. The same sequences were crosslinked less readily than total DNA
in vitro; we calculate a 3.4 to 3.8-fold excess crosslink number in these
sequences due to chromatin microenvironment. We tested for effect of
transcriptional induction on crosslink sensitivity in the heat shock genes. At
low [TMP], heat shock stimulated crosslinkage at or very near heat shock genes in
cells, but not in other sequences or in naked DNA. However, overall crosslink
sensitivity was unaffected by heat shock. This suggests that transcription
increased the affinity of some heat shock gene DNA binding sites for TMP without 
increasing the number of such sites.

DOI: 10.1016/0022-2836(88)90142-8 
PMID: 2843648  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


39. EMBO J. 1988 Mar;7(3):835-41.

DNA-binding properties of an adenovirus 289R E1A protein.

Chatterjee PK(1), Bruner M, Flint SJ, Harter ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, NJ 08544.

An adenovirus 2 289 amino acid (289R) E1A protein purified from Escherichia coli 
has been shown to interact with DNA by two independent methods. UV-crosslinking
of complexes containing unmodified, uniformly 32P-labelled DNA and purified E1A
protein induced efficient labelling of the protein with covalently attached
oligonucleotides, indicating that the E1A protein itself contacts DNA. Discrete
nucleoprotein species were also observed when E1A protein--DNA complexes were
analysed by gel electrophoresis. Although the 289R E1A protein exhibited no
significant binding to single-stranded DNA or to RNA, no evidence for its
sequence-specific binding to double-stranded DNA was obtained with either assay. 
Identification of the sites of covalent attachment of 32P-labelled
oligonucleotides by partial proteolysis of the crosslinked E1A protein indicated 
that the interaction of this protein with DNA is mediated via domain(s) in the
C-terminal half of the protein. Such previously unrecognized DNA-binding activity
is likely to contribute to the regulatory activities of this important adenoviral
protein.


PMCID: PMC454399
PMID: 2969333  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Mol Biol. 1988 Jan 5;199(1):115-36.

A detailed model of the three-dimensional structure of Escherichia coli 16 S
ribosomal RNA in situ in the 30 S subunit.

Brimacombe R(1), Atmadja J, Stiege W, Schüler D.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Genetik, Abteilung Wittmann, Berlin-Dahlem,
Germany.

A large body of intra-RNA and RNA-protein crosslinking data, obtained in this
laboratory, was used to fold the phylogenetically and experimentally established 
secondary structure of Escherichia coli 16 S RNA into a three-dimensional model. 
All the crosslinks were induced in intact 30 S subunits (or in some cases in
growing E. coli cells), and the sites of crosslinking were precisely localized on
the RNA by oligonucleotide analysis. The RNA-protein crosslinking data (including
28 sites, and involving 13 of the 21 30S ribosomal were used to relate the RNA
structure to the distribution of the proteins as determined by neutron
scattering. The three-dimensional model of the 16 S RNA has overall dimensions of
220 A x 140 A x 90 A, in good agreement with electron microscopic estimates for
the 30 S subunit. The shape of the model is also recognizably the same as that
seen in electron micrographs, and the positions in the model of bases localized
on the 30 S subunit by immunoelectron microscopy (the 5' and 3' termini, the m7G 
and m6(2)A residues, and C-1400) correspond closely to their experimentally
observed positions. The distances between the RNA-protein crosslink sites in the 
model correlate well with the distances between protein centres of mass obtained 
by neutron scattering, only two out of 66 distances falling outside the expected 
tolerance limits. These two distances both involve protein S13, a protein noted
for its anomalous behaviour. A comparison with other experimental information not
specifically used in deriving the model shows that it fits well with published
data on RNA-protein binding sites, mutation sites on the RNA causing resistance
to antibiotics, tertiary interactions in the RNA, and a potential secondary
structural "switch". Of the sites on 16 S RNA that have been found to be
accessible to chemical modification in the 30 S subunit, 87% are at obviously
exposed positions in the model. In contrast, 70% of the sites corresponding to
positions that have ribose 2'-O-methylations in the eukaryotic 18 S RNA from
Xenopus laevis are at non-exposed (i.e. internal) positions in the model. All
nine of the modified bases in the E. coli 16 S RNA itself show a remarkable
distribution, in that they form a "necklace" in one plane around the "throat" of 
the subunit. Insertions in eukaryotic 18 S RNA, and corresponding deletions in
chloroplast or mammalian mitochondrial ribosomal RNA relative to E. coli 16 S RNA
represent distinct sub-domains in the structure.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1016/0022-2836(88)90383-x 
PMID: 2451022  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Mol Immunol. 1987 Nov;24(11):1199-205.

Fc gamma receptor effects on induction of c-myc mRNA expression in mouse B
lymphocytes by anti-immunoglobulin.

Phillips NE(1), Parker DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Massachusetts
Medical Center, Worcester 01605.

Levels of c-myc mRNA have been assayed in mouse B cells cultured for 8 hr with
Fab'2 anti-Ig or IgG anti-Ig. Fab'2 anti-Ig induces DNA synthesis in B cells,
whereas the whole molecule inhibits anti-Ig-induced DNA synthesis by crosslinking
the B cell Fc gamma R to mIg. Both the Fab'2 fragment and the IgG anti-Ig induce 
an increase in c-myc mRNA by 1 hr. Thereafter, levels in cells stimulated with
submitogenic doses of Fab'2 anti-Ig or any dose of IgG anti-Ig returned to
background, while levels in cultures containing a mitogenic dose of Fab'2 anti-Ig
remained elevated.

DOI: 10.1016/0161-5890(87)90166-0 
PMID: 2961982  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Nucleic Acids Res. 1987 Oct 26;15(20):8417-38.

Characterization of the effects on ovalbumin mRNA of
aminomethyl-trimethylpsoralen photoreaction with hen oviduct mRNA.

Liarakos CD(1), Reinhart G, Kopper RA, Maddox RP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Arkansas for
Medical Sciences, Little Rock 72205.

We have described the reaction of 4'-aminomethyl-4,5',8-trimethylpsoralen (AMT)
with hen oviduct mRNA and have investigated the specific effects of AMT
photoaddition on ovalbumin mRNA which constitutes 60-70% of oviduct mRNA. The
photoreaction of AMT with hen oviduct mRNA appeared to occur in two phases - a
rapid monoaddition followed by a slower conversion of monoadducts to diadducts
(i.e. crosslinking). Both nondenaturing and denaturing gel electrophoresis
revealed a photoreaction time dependent increase in ovalbumin mRNA
electrophoretic mobility indicating the formation of a progressively more compact
molecular structure. Identical analysis of photoreacted rabbit globin mRNA
revealed no change in electrophoretic mobility suggesting that AMT was
stabilizing the AU rich secondary structure of ovalbumin mRNA but having no
similar effect on the relatively GC rich secondary structure of globin mRNA.
Ovalbumin-specific DNA primer extension was used to demonstrate the selective and
secondary structure specific photoaddition of AMT to uracil bases at the 5' end
of ovalbumin mRNA.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/15.20.8417 
PMCID: PMC306368
PMID: 3671087  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1987 Sep 30;147(3):1188-93.

Glucocorticoid receptors are associated with particles containing DNA and RNA in 
vivo.

Rossini GP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Chimica Biologica, Università di Modena, Italy.

Chemical crosslinking of glucocorticoid-receptor complexes to associated
components in living cells was performed by the use of formaldehyde.
Glucocorticoid binding sites were predominantly located in nuclei, and could not 
be efficiently extracted by 0.3 M NaCl. Sonication was found to cause the release
of about 40% of nuclear receptor complexes. By sucrose density gradient
centrifugation of soluble extracts from nuclear sonicates, crosslinked receptor
complexes were found in oligomeric forms under high salt conditions. Treatment of
these extracts with hydrolytic enzymes showed that DNA and RNA were associated
with crosslinked receptor complexes.

DOI: 10.1016/s0006-291x(87)80195-x 
PMID: 2444225  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Mol Biol. 1987 Aug 20;196(4):829-43.

Structure of the extrachromosomal ribosomal RNA chromatin of Physarum
polycephalum.

Lucchini R(1), Pauli U, Braun R, Koller T, Sogo JM.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie ETH-Hönggerberg, Zürich, Switzerland.

Isolated nucleoli from exponentially growing microplasmodia of Physarum
polycephalum were digested with micrococcal nuclease or DNAase I, or were
photoreacted with trimethyl psoralen. In the coding region for the precursor of
the ribosomal RNA, micrococcal nuclease and DNAase I digestions show
predominantly a smear, and treatment with psoralen leads to a fairly continuous
crosslinking of the DNA. All three assays are compatible with the absence of a
typical nucleosomal array in most of the gene copies. In contrast, in the central
non-transcribed spacer, except in the immediate 5'-flanking region, micrococcal
nuclease and DNAase I digestions yield fragments that are multiples of a basic
repeat, compatible with a nucleosomal packing of this region. The crosslinking
pattern with psoralen confirms this conclusion. In addition, there are three
sites over 400 base-pairs long that are inaccessible for psoralen crosslinking.
Two of these sites have been mapped to the putative origins of replication. In
the terminal non-transcribed spacer, except in the immediate 3'-flanking region, 
digestions with micrococcal nuclease and DNAase I give a smeared repeat. The
crosslinking pattern after treatment with psoralen suggests that this region is
packed in nucleosomes, except for about 900 base-pairs constituting the telomere 
regions of the linear extrachromosomal palindromic rDNA. Micrococcal nuclease
digestion of the immediate 5'-flanking region shows a complete absence of any
nucleosomal repeat, but digestion with DNAase I leads to a faint ten base-pair
repeat. In contrast, in the 3'-flanking regions both nuclease assays indicate a
chromatin structure similar to the coding region. Both flanking regions are
unusual with respect to psoralen crosslinking, in that crosslinking is reduced
both in chromatin and deproteinized DNA. On the basis of the known
sequence-dependent psoralen crosslinking and the established sequences in these
regions, crosslinking should be expected to occur. However, it does not and we
therefore propose the presence of an unusual DNA conformation in these regions.

DOI: 10.1016/0022-2836(87)90408-6 
PMID: 3681980  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1987 Aug;84(16):5680-4.

Alternative splicing of human elastin mRNA indicated by sequence analysis of
cloned genomic and complementary DNA.

Indik Z, Yeh H, Ornstein-Goldstein N, Sheppard P, Anderson N, Rosenbloom JC,
Peltonen L, Rosenbloom J.

Poly(A)+ RNA, isolated from a single 7-mo fetal human aorta, was used to
synthesize cDNA by the RNase H method, and the cDNA was inserted into lambda
gt10. Recombinant phage containing elastin sequences were identified by
hybridization with cloned, exon-containing fragments of the human elastin gene.
Three clones containing inserts of 3.3, 2.7, and 2.3 kilobases were selected for 
further analysis. Three overlapping clones containing 17.8 kilobases of the human
elastin gene were also isolated from genomic libraries. Complete sequence
analysis of the six clones demonstrated that: the cDNA encompassed the entire
translated portion of the mRNA encoding 786 amino acids, including several
unusual hydrophilic amino acid sequences not previously identified in porcine
tropoelastin, exons encoding either hydrophobic or crosslinking domains in the
protein alternated in the gene, and a great abundance of Alu repetitive sequences
occurred throughout the introns. The data also indicated substantial alternative 
splicing of the mRNA. These results suggest the potential for significant
variation in the precise molecular structure of the elastic fiber in the human
population.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.84.16.5680 
PMCID: PMC298926
PMID: 3039501  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1987 Jun 15;89(1):105-21.

Further studies of the metabolic incorporation and covalent binding of inhaled
[3H]- and [14C]formaldehyde in Fischer-344 rats: effects of glutathione
depletion.

Casanova M, Heck Hd'A.

Glutathione (GSH) is required for the oxidation of formaldehyde (HCHO) to formate
catalyzed by formaldehyde dehydrogenase (FDH). The effects of GSH depletion on
the mechanisms of labeling of macromolecules in the rat nasal mucosa and bone
marrow by 3HCHO and H14CHO were investigated. Male rats were exposed for 3 hr to 
atmospheres containing 3HCHO and H14CHO at concentrations of 0.9, 2, 4, 6, or 10 
ppm, 1 day after a single 3-hr preexposure to the same concentration of unlabeled
HCHO. Two hours prior to the second exposure, the animals were injected either
with phorone (300 mg/kg, ip) or with corn oil. The concentration of nonprotein
sulfhydryls in the nasal respiratory mucosa of phorone-injected rats was
decreased to 10% of that of corn oil-injected rats. The metabolic incorporation
of 3HCHO and H14CHO into DNA, RNA, and proteins in the respiratory and olfactory 
mucosa and bone marrow (femur) was significantly decreased, and DNA-protein
crosslinking was significantly increased in the respiratory mucosa of
phorone-injected relative to corn oil-injected rats at all HCHO concentrations.
DNA-protein crosslinks were not detected in the respiratory mucosa of corn
oil-injected rats at 0.9 ppm. Evidence was obtained for the formation of adducts 
of HCHO with the RNA from the nasal respiratory mucosa of phorone-injected rats
at concentrations above 0.9 ppm. Covalent binding of HCHO to macromolecules in
the bone marrow was not detected. These results indicate that the GSH-dependent
oxidation of HCHO catalyzed by FDH is an important defense mechanism against the 
covalent reactions of HCHO with nucleic acids in the respiratory mucosa.
Experiments using phorone-injected rats exposed to 10 ppm of [3H]- and
[14C]formaldehyde showed that the DNA from the respiratory mucosa was enriched in
3H relative to 14C in comparison to the inhaled vapor. The enrichment is
explained by an isotope effect in the oxidation of 3HCHO and H14CHO (H. d'A, Heck
and M. Casanova (1987). Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 89, 122-134), which results in 
3H enrichment of the residual (unoxidized) HCHO that binds to DNA. A non-linear
pharmacokinetic model is proposed that depicts the potential effects of FDH
saturation on the relative concentrations of intracellular to extracellular HCHO.

DOI: 10.1016/0041-008x(87)90181-5 
PMID: 2438809  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1986 Nov;83(21):8024-8.

Characterization of cDNA coding for human factor XIIIa.

Grundmann U, Amann E, Zettlmeissl G, Küpper HA.

A cDNA library prepared from human placenta has been screened for sequences
coding for factor XIIIa, the enzymatically active subunit of the factor XIII
complex that stabilizes blood clots through crosslinking of fibrin molecules. Two
oligonucleotides, based on the amino acid sequences of tryptic peptides of factor
XIIIa, were used as hybridization probes. Of 0.36 X 10(6) independent
recombinants, 1 clone was identified that hybridized to both probes. The insert
of 1704 base pairs coded for the amino-terminal 541 amino acid residues of the
mature factor XIIIa molecule. Blot-hybridization analysis using this cDNA as a
probe showed that the factor XIIIa mRNA from placenta has a size of approximately
4000 bases. The insert was used to rescreen cDNA libraries and to identify
further factor XIIIa-specific sequences. The total length of the isolated factor 
XIIIa cDNA is 3905 bases, and it codes for a protein of 732 amino acids. In spite
of the presence of factor XIII in blood plasma, we could not identify a leader
sequence typical for secreted proteins.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.83.21.8024 
PMCID: PMC386859
PMID: 2877457  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Mol Biol. 1986 Oct 5;191(3):469-82.

Structure of in-vivo transcribing chromatin as studied in simian virus 40
minichromosomes.

De Bernardin W, Koller T, Sogo JM.

In order to study the structure of chromatin during transcription, individual
in-vivo transcribing simian virus 40 (SV40) minichromosomes were analyzed in the 
electron microscope after crosslinking the nascent RNA strands with different
psoralen derivatives to the template DNA. Since psoralen crosslinks the DNA
between nucleosomes, spreading of the crosslinked DNA and DNA-RNA complexes
reveals single-stranded bubbles at positions where nucleosomes were located. We
found that the transcribing SV40 minichromosomes contained a similar number of
nucleosomes as did the minichromosomes without crosslinked nascent RNA. The
nascent RNA was crosslinked in about equal proportions either in single-stranded 
bubbles of nucleosomal length or in continuously crosslinked regions between
bubbles, in contrast with control experiments with ribosomal chromatin of
Dictyostelium. Treatment of SV40 minichromosomes with 1.2 M-NaCl before and
during photocrosslinking with psoralen led to the disappearance of the
single-stranded bubbles. Since no bubbles could be detected at the attachment
sites of the RNA molecules when the nucleosomes were disrupted in high salt, and 
since in about half of the molecules the RNA was attached to fully crosslinked
linker DNA, we assume that the single-stranded bubbles with crosslinked RNA are
not due to protection by the elongating RNA polymerase II complex, but are rather
due to nucleosome-like structures. At the resolution level of single nucleosomes,
these results imply for the first time that nucleosome-like structures (perhaps
modified compared with "normal" nucleosomes) on SV40 minichromosomes do not
prevent transcription elongation by RNA polymerase II.

DOI: 10.1016/0022-2836(86)90142-7 
PMID: 3029385  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1986 Aug;83(15):5449-53.

Characterization of a cDNA encoding the heparin and collagen binding domains of
human thrombospondin.

Dixit VM, Hennessy SW, Grant GA, Rotwein P, Frazier WA.

Thrombospondin (TSP) cDNA clones were isolated from a human fibroblast cDNA
library by screening with degenerate synthetic oligodeoxynucleotides. The probes 
were designed based on the sequences of peptides isolated from tryptic digests of
TSP. The largest clone identified contains an open reading frame that encodes the
amino-terminal heparin binding domain of TSP and part of the immediately adjacent
collagen binding domain, a region of TSP that includes the site of disulfide
crosslinking responsible for trimer formation. In addition to the known
amino-terminal sequence of mature TSP (which is identical to that of the heparin 
binding domain) and that of the collagen binding domain, the open reading frame
predicts the amino acid sequences of four tryptic peptides including the one from
which the probe sequences were derived. The sequence of the mature protein is
preceded by an unusual signal peptide sequence of 18 residues. The heparin
binding domain contains 240 amino acids including only one intradomain disulfide 
bond. In contrast, 80 residues beyond the start of the collagen binding domain, a
cluster of 10 cysteine residues occurs within 40 amino acids corresponding to the
point of interchain disulfide crosslinking in the TSP trimer. RNA blot analysis
indicates a TSP mRNA size of approximately equal to 8 kilobases and Southern
blots are consistent with a single gene encoding TSP.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.83.15.5449 
PMCID: PMC386304
PMID: 3461443  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Radiat Res. 1986 Jul;107(1):24-38.

Nuclear matrix proteins are crosslinked to transcriptionally active gene
sequences by ionizing radiation.

Chiu SM, Friedman LR, Sokany NM, Xue LY, Oleinick NL.

Unirradiated, exponentially growing Chinese hamster cells contain a low level
(less than 5%) of their DNA firmly bound to protein, as measured by a
filter-binding assay. That fraction of DNA is highly enriched in sequences which 
hybridize to poly(A+)RNA or ribosomal RNA. After 60 Gy gamma irradiation, the
additional crosslinked DNA is also enriched in transcriptionally active sequences
compared to bulk DNA, while DNA crosslinked by uv radiation has a frequency of
active sequences which is no higher than the bulk DNA. DNA crosslinked to protein
by gamma radiation but not by uv is largely released during a 4-h postirradiation
incubation. The DNA which remains bound to protein during that period becomes
depleted in active sequences; this is followed by an apparent restoration of the 
active gene-enriched protein complex found in unirradiated cells. When nuclear
matrix-associated DNA was isolated free of the majority ("loop") DNA, an
enrichment for active DNA sequences was found in the matrix-associated DNA, and
the frequency of DNA-protein crosslinks was found to be 10- to 16-fold greater in
the matrix fraction. Gel electrophoretic analysis of the crosslinking proteins
identifies them as subset of proteins of the nuclear matrix. These data are
consistent with known properties of the nuclear matrix and suggest that chromatin
structure plays an important role in the formation and repair of
gamma-radiation-induced DNA lesions.


PMID: 3737877  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Cell. 1986 Feb 14;44(3):401-7.

Topoisomerase I interacts with transcribed regions in Drosophila cells.

Gilmour DS, Pflugfelder G, Wang JC, Lis JT.

The in vivo distribution of topoisomerase I on specific DNA sequences is
determined at high resolution in Drosophila cells using a photo-crosslinking
method. Topoisomerase I-DNA adducts are generated by irradiation of intact cells 
with UV light and then purified by immunoprecipitation with antibody to
topoisomerase I. Analyses of the DNA sequences crosslinked to topoisomerase I by 
blot-hybridization with appropriate DNA probes indicate that topoisomerase I is
concentrated on transcribed regions and not on nontranscribed flanking sequences.
Like RNA polymerase II, topoisomerase I is recruited to heat-shock genes during
the heat-shock response. However, topoisomerase I and RNA polymerase II can
interact independently with the transcribed region because different ratios of
topoisomerase I and RNA polymerase II are crosslinked to the highly transcribed
hsp70 gene and the moderately transcribed copia genes. We hypothesize that
topoisomerase I allows topological changes in DNA that are required for
transcription.

DOI: 10.1016/0092-8674(86)90461-7 
PMID: 3002635  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Mol Biol Rep. 1986;11(2):107-15.

UV crosslinking of RNA to nylon membrane enhances hybridization signals.

Khandjian EW.

An improvement in the detection by nucleic acid hybridization of
size-fractionated RNA immobilized to nylon-based membranes is described.
Electrophoretic transfer of RNA to nylon membranes permits a quantitative
determination of different RNA transcripts on the same membrane after sequential 
hybridization using different 32P-labeled DNA probes. UV crosslinking of the RNA 
to the nylon membrane increased the intensity of the radioactive signals. Using
the method reported here, increased signals of between 10 and 40 fold were
observed, depending on the species of transcript tested. Moderately abundant as
well as rare transcripts can easily be detected in as little as 5 micrograms
total cellular RNA.


PMID: 2426570  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Mol Biol. 1985 Jul 5;184(1):67-80.

Structure of the Escherichia coli 16 S ribosomal RNA. Psoralen crosslinks and
N-acetyl-N'-(p-glyoxylylbenzoyl)cystamine crosslinks detected by electron
microscopy.

Wollenzien PL, Murphy RF, Cantor CR, Expert-Bezançon A, Hayes DH.

Escherichia coli 16 S ribosomal RNA in reconstitution buffer has been
photochemically crosslinked with aminomethyltrimethylpsoralen and chemically
crosslinked with N-acetyl-N'-(p-glyoxylylbenzoyl)cystamine. The positions of
crosslinking have been detected by viewing the molecules in the electron
microscope. DNA restriction fragments that contain psoralen mono-adducts were
hybridized and crosslinked to the samples so that the orientations of the
crosslinked molecules were seen directly. A two-dimensional histogram method has 
been used to classify the different types of looped crosslinked molecules. These 
methods allow the identification of 13 distinct types of loops in the
photochemically crosslinked molecules and 31 distinct types of loops in the
chemically crosslinked molecules. The psoralen experiments are a reinvestigation 
of some of our earlier results. Some of the crosslinks were previously reported
in the incorrect orientation; with the corrected orientation, seven of the
psoralen crosslinks can now be correlated with complementarities in the proposed 
secondary-structure models. However, there are still six other psoralen
crosslinks that indicate additional contacts not found in the current models. The
chemical crosslinks indicate pairs of single-stranded regions that must be close 
in the folded molecule. Many of these crosslinks occur between regions that are
distant in the secondary structure; these crosslinks indicate part of the
three-dimensional form of the folded molecule.

DOI: 10.1016/0022-2836(85)90044-0 
PMID: 2411937  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Nucleic Acids Res. 1985 Jun 11;13(11):3805-22.

Eukaryotic ternary transcription complexes: transcription complexes of RNA
polymerase II are associated with histone-containing, nucleosome-like particles
in vivo.

Sargan DR, Butterworth PH.

Using a psoralen crosslinking, radioactive labelling technique, we have
previously been able to study ternary transcription complexes containing
DNA-dependent RNA polymerases I and II which are released from rat liver nuclei
by endogenous nuclease digestion [Sargan and Butterworth, refs 1 and 2]. Although
the DNA component of these complexes was found to have a 'nucleosome-like' size
profile and although the experimental conditions for autodigestion were designed 
to minimise histone rearrangement, it is necessary to provide further evidence
that the periodicity of nuclease cutting around these transcription complexes is 
conferred by histones. Studies using secondary nuclease digestion of the released
transcription complexes now show a digestion barrier characteristic of that
conferred by nucleosomal histones which is lost if histones are removed from the 
complexes. Furthermore, antibodies raised against histones are effective in
precipitating transcription complexes of RNA polymerase II and, to a lesser
extent, of RNA polymerase I. The data suggest that, in rat hepatic tissue,
transcription complexes are in very close proximity (within a few hundred base
pairs) of histone-containing, nucleosome-like particles in vivo.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/13.11.3805 
PMCID: PMC341279
PMID: 4011443  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Mol Biol. 1984 Oct 5;178(4):897-919.

Psoralen-crosslinking of DNA as a probe for the structure of active nucleolar
chromatin.

Sogo JM, Ness PJ, Widmer RM, Parish RW, Koller T.

Trimethylpsoralen was used to crosslink the extrachromosomal ribosomal DNA in
nucleoli or nuclei of growing Dictyostelium discoideum cells. The DNA was
extracted and was examined by spreading under denaturing conditions for electron 
microscopy. Intact 95,000 base ribosomal DNA molecules were seen, showing
regularly spaced, single-stranded bubbles of about 200 to 400 bases in size,
interrupted twice by 11,000 base heavily crosslinked stretches, which correspond 
to the known positions of the coding regions. The bubbles on the nontranscribed
regions indicate the presence of nucleosomes during crosslinking. The DNA was
digested with restriction enzymes and analysed by gel electrophoresis in parallel
with DNA not treated with psoralen. Fragments from the non-coding region had the 
same mobility as untreated DNA, while those from the coding region had a markedly
lower mobility, though not as low as that of crosslinked pure DNA. This shifting 
of the bands, specific to the coding region, was also seen when whole cells were 
treated with psoralen. Treatment of nucleoli with 2 m-NaCl (which is known to
dissociate histones) before addition of psoralen led to strong crosslinking all
along the ribosomal DNA, resulting in a decreased electrophoretic mobility of
bands from the non-coding region, but no further retardation of those from the
coding region. In differentiating Dictyostelium cells, slugs, where ribosomal RNA
synthesis is very much reduced, the extent of psoralen-crosslinking in the coding
region was reduced, but not completely to the level of that of the
non-transcribed spacer. In order to test whether psoralen itself alters chromatin
structure, crosslinked and non-crosslinked nucleoli from growing cells were lysed
with heparin and spread for electron microscopy. There was no difference in the
appearance or the frequency of the transcription units seen. Digestion of
crosslinked nuclei with micrococcal nuclease indicated an undisturbed structure
for bulk chromatin, as well as for the chromatin in the non-transcribed spacer of
the ribosomal DNA. Thus psoralen-crosslinking does not lead to extensive
disruption or distortion of the structure of either inactive or active chromatin.
We conclude, taking the results presented in the Appendix into account, that the 
extent of psoralen-crosslinking in chromatin DNA is diagnostic for the structure 
of undistorted chromatin.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1016/0022-2836(84)90318-8 
PMID: 6092647  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


56. DNA. 1984 Oct;3(5):365-76.

Interaction of small nuclear ribonucleoproteins with simian virus 40 in CV-1
cells: is U2 snRNA involved in regulating replication?

Savouret JF, Cathala G, Eberhardt NL, Miller WL, Baxter JD.

The small nuclear RNAs (snRNAs) in African Green Monkey kidney cells (CV-1 cells)
were examined by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Methodology was developed to
improve their extraction from enriched fractions. Cellular fractionation studies 
and subsequent analysis of these RNAs indicate that they are tightly associated
with chromatin. Treatment of cells with alpha-amanitin totally suppressed
transcription of U1, U2, U4, U5, and partially suppressed transcription of U6,
suggesting that these snRNAs are transcribed by RNA polymerase II. Upon infection
of the cells by simian virus 40 (SV40), overall transcription of these and other 
cellular RNAs was stimulated. Gel filtration and formaldehyde crosslinking
studies indicated that the ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs) containing snRNAs are
associated with the viral minichromosome. Nucleotide sequence comparisons show
extensive sequence complementarity between the 5' end of U2 RNA, the replication 
origin of SV40, and a prokaryotic RNA (RNA I) that is involved in control of
plasmid replication. The clustered homologies between these RNAs and the
association of snRNAs with the SV40 chromosome suggest that snRNAs may be
evolutionarily related to small RNAs from plasmids and are consistent with an
hypothesis that U2 RNA may be involved in DNA replication.

DOI: 10.1089/dna.1984.3.365 
PMID: 6210183  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1984 Sep;233(2):408-16.

Effects of dietary polyunsaturated fats and vitamin E on aging and peroxidative
damage to DNA.

Summerfield FW, Tappel AL.

Peroxidative damage to DNA was studied in rats fed either a diet with 10%
tocopherol-stripped corn oil and 30 IU DL-alpha-tocopherol acetate/kg (group A), 
the same diet without vitamin E (group B), a diet with 24% corn oil without
vitamin E (group C), or the diet of group A for 10 months and then the diet of
group C for 4 months (group D). After 3, 6, 9, and 14 months of feeding the
diets, body weights, motoric activities, testicular weights, and lipid-soluble
fluorophores in testes were measured. Groups A and B had higher hepatic DNA
template activities at 9 and 14 months than group C, and group A had higher
testicular DNA template activities than groups B and C at 6, 9, and 14 months.
Hepatic DNA template activity of group C decreased from 6 to 9 and from 9 to 14
months. Group C hepatic DNA transcribed less long RNA than that of groups B and
D, and more short RNA than groups B and D. Group A testicular DNA transcribed
more medium-length RNA than that of groups B and D, and less short RNA than that 
of groups B, C, and D. DNA-bound tryptophan and DNA crosslinking were inversely
related to DNA template activities. DNA damage correlated with other biochemical 
and physiological changes that are characteristic of cellular impairment in aging
and disease.

DOI: 10.1016/0003-9861(84)90462-4 
PMID: 6486794  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Virology. 1984 Aug;137(1):1-8.

Reovirus RNA transcriptase: evidence for a conformational change during
activation of the core particle.

Powell KF, Harvey JD, Bellamy AR.

Reovirus cores contain an RNA transcriptase capable of synthesizing messenger
RNA. When cores are suspended in 1 X SSC at 37 degrees they are quiescent and
synthesize no product, but in the presence of the components of an RNA
transcriptase reaction mixture they actively synthesize mRNA. Photochemical
crosslinking has been used to investigate the arrangement of RNA and protein in
both "quiescent" and "active" cores. Irradiation induces the formation of a
noncovalent RNA:protein complex in "quiescent" but not in "active" cores. This
difference is attributed to a conformational change in the reovirus core which
results from the transition between the "quiescent" and "active" states of the
particle.

DOI: 10.1016/0042-6822(84)90002-3 
PMID: 6206643  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Mutat Res. 1984 Apr;126(2):113-20.

Vitamin E protects against methyl ethyl ketone peroxide-induced peroxidative
damage to rat brain DNA.

Summerfield FW, Tappel AL.

Peroxidative damage to DNA initiated by methyl ethyl ketone peroxide, a potent
initiator of lipid peroxidation, and protection against this damage by vitamin E 
were studied in rats. Groups of rats were fed a casein-based diet that contained 
10% tocopherol-stripped corn oil and either 0, 3, 5, or 10 IU of
DL-alpha-tocopherol acetate/kg; the groups were named 0, 3, 5, or 10,
respectively. DNA isolated from the brains of these rats was analyzed for
template activity, bound tryptophan, and malondialdehyde-type DNA-protein and
interstrand DNA crosslinks. The DNA of groups 5 and 10 had significantly higher
template activity, less bound tryptophan, and fewer crosslinks than that of
groups 3 and 5, respectively. The DNA of group 3 had significantly fewer
interstrand DNA crosslinks than that of group 0, and the most significant
differences were between groups 3 and 5. Loss of template activity correlated
best with interstrand DNA crosslinks, and bound tryptophan correlated best with
DNA-protein crosslinks. Electrophoresis of the RNA transcribed from the isolated 
DNA showed that a significantly higher percentage of longer RNA was made from the
DNA of groups 5 and 10 than from that of group 0. The apparent molecular weight
of the DNA of group 0 was less than that of group 10 and was more heterogeneous, 
which suggests fragmentation and/or crosslinking. The DNA from group 10 had
maximum observed template activity; therefore, 10 IU of vitamin E/kg of diet
appeared to be adequate to protect brain DNA against the damage measured in this 
study.

DOI: 10.1016/0027-5107(84)90052-6 
PMID: 6201734  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Cancer Treat Rev. 1983 Dec;10 Suppl B:3-11.

Molecular and biochemical pharmacology of mitoxantrone.

Durr FE, Wallace RE, Citarella RV.

Evidence has been presented which indicates that Nv: intercalates DNA and
additionally causes inter- and intra-strand crosslinking possibly associated with
its charged side arms; there is an apparent preference for G-C base pairs;
induces single strand and double strand breaks in DNA; strongly inhibits DNA and 
RNA synthesis; causes nuclear aberrations and chromosomal scattering; induces a
block in the G2 phase of the cell cycle with an increase in cellular RNA and
polyploidy; is not cell cycle phase-specific with respect to cell kill; does not 
induce free-radical formation; does not induce lipid peroxidation or superoxide
formation; rather it may inhibit ADR-stimulated lipid peroxidation and microsomal
superoxide production; does not appear to have a strong potential for
cardiotoxicity on the basis of currently postulated mechanisms of action; is
capable of inducing cellular resistance in vitro; resistance is associated with
an apparent alteration in the cell membrane impairing drug transport into the
cell. Although the precise mechanism(s) of tumor cell killing has not been fully 
defined it is most likely associated with an interaction by Nv with chromosomes
resulting in DNA damage, which if not efficiently repaired, will lead to
inhibition of nucleic acid synthesis and eventual cell death.


PMID: 6362876  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Radiat Res. 1983 Sep;95(3):541-9.

Psoralen plus near-ultraviolet light: a possible new method for measuring DNA
repair synthesis.

Heimer YM, Kol R, Shiloh Y, Riklis E.

A new method is proposed to inhibit semiconservative DNA synthesis in cultured
cells while DNA repair synthesis is being measured. The cells are treated with
the DNA-crosslinking agent Trioxalen (4,5,8-trimethylpsoralen) plus
near-ultraviolet light, and consequently 99.5% inhibition of replicative DNA
synthesis is achieved. Additional DNA-damaging agents induce thymidine
incorporation into the double-stranded regions of the DNA. The new method gave
results very similar to those obtained with the benzoylated naphthoylated DEAE
(BND) cellulose method using three human fibroblast strains, of which one had
deficient capacity for DNA repair synthesis following treatment with gamma rays
and methyl methanesulfonate. The advantages of the new method are simplicity and 
rapidity, as well as the high extent to which replicative DNA synthesis is
inhibited.


PMID: 6310675  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1983 Jul;80(14):4296-300.

In vitro assembly of a pre-messenger ribonucleoprotein.

Economidis IV, Pederson T.

Transcription of the Bal I E restriction fragment of adenovirus DNA by RNA
polymerase II in a HeLa cell extract produces a RNA transcript 1,712 nucleotides 
in length. This transcript contains the first two elements of the tripartite
leader that, in vivo, is spliced onto the late mRNAs. We have found that this
adenovirus 2 transcript forms a specific ribonucleoprotein complex (RNP) in this 
in vitro system. The RNP particle sediments in sucrose gradients as a
monodisperse peak at 50 S and has a buoyant density of 1.34 g/cm3 in Cs2SO4,
indicating the same 4:1 protein/RNA composition as native nuclear RNPs that
contain pre-mRNA sequences (hnRNP). Moreover, the in vitro-assembled RNP is
resistant to concentrations of NaCl that are known to dissociate nonspecific
RNA-protein complexes. The adenovirus 2 transcript is precipitated by a
monoclonal antibody for hnRNP core proteins. In addition, RNA-protein
crosslinking of [alpha-32P]UTP-labeled transcript/RNP complexes reveals that the 
major proteins in contact with the RNA are the Mr 32,500-41,500 species known to 
be associated with hnRNA in vivo. These results demonstrate the in vitro assembly
of a specific RNA polymerase II transcript into RNP. Moreover, because the
1,712-nucleotide adenovirus 2 transcript lacks poly(A) addition sites and because
the leader sequences are not spliced appreciably in this in vitro system, it
follows that RNP formation requires neither polyadenylylation nor splicing, nor
is it sufficient to cause the latter.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.80.14.4296 
PMCID: PMC384024
PMID: 6308613  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Atherosclerosis. 1982 Oct;45(1):17-31.

D-penicillamine-induced angiopathy in rats. Changes in aortic collagen,
glycosaminoglycans, DNA and RNA in rats treated with D-penicillamine.

Junker P, Helin G, Jensen BA, Oxlund H, Lorenzen I.

Male Sprague-Dawley rats were treated with D-penicillamine (D-pen) in doses of
100, 250 or 500 mg/kg per day for 10, 32, 42 or 70 days. In addition animals were
examined 28 days after withdrawal from 42 day's treatment with D-pen at 100 or
500 mg/kg per day. Pair-fed rats served as controls. The changes in aortic
collagen, glycosaminoglycans (GAGs), DNA and RNA were studied. D-Pen had a dose- 
and time-related solubilizing effect on aortic collagen, which regained normal
resistance to extraction within 28 days after cessation of the treatment. In
contrast, D-pen caused a progressive accumulation of hydroxyproline (Hyp) in the 
aortic wall during and after treatment, probably mediated by an increased number 
of matrix synthesizing cells, as judged by augmentation of the DNA content in the
presence of unaltered Hyp/DNA and RNA/DNA ratios. The relative amount of type III
collagen was increased after 500 mg/kg per day D-pen for 10 and 42 days. High
doses of D-pen increased the percentage of water in the aortic wall and reduced
the ratio of Hyp to total tissue protein, suggesting an increased content of
water-binding substances. This was confirmed by GAG accumulation. Hyaluronic acid
(HA) and chondroitin 4,6-sulphate (CHS) were predominant after 32 and 42 days,
whereas CHS, heparan sulphate (HS) and dermatan sulphate (DS) prevailed after 70 
days of treatment. These observations suggest that processes of repair and
regeneration are elicited secondary to the inhibitory effect of D-pen on aortic
collagen and elastin crosslinking. Hypertrophy of the vessel wall may imply an
increased rigidity, resulting in further increase of the susceptibility to
haemodynamic injury.

DOI: 10.1016/0021-9150(82)90168-x 
PMID: 6186262  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Nucleic Acids Res. 1982 Apr 10;10(7):2399-414.

Laser crosslinking of E. coli RNA polymerase and T7 DNA.

Harrison CA, Turner DH, Hinkle DC.

The first photochemical crosslinking of a protein to a nucleic acid using laser
excitation is reported. A single, 120 mJ, 20 ns pulse at 248 nm crosslinks about 
10% of bound E. coli RNA polymerase to T7 DNA under the conditions studied. The
crosslinking yield depends on mercaptoethanol concentration, and is a linear
function of laser intensity. The protein subunits crosslinked to DNA are beta,
beta' and sigma.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/10.7.2399 
PMCID: PMC320618
PMID: 7045809  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1981 Sep 28;655(2):152-66.

Quantitative aspects of the formation and loss of DNA interstrand crosslinks in
Chinese hamster cells following treatment with cis-diamminedichloroplatinum(II)
(cisplatin). II. Comparison of results from alkaline elution, DNA renaturation
and DNA sedimentation studies.

Pera MF Jr, Rawlings CJ, Shackleton J, Roberts JJ.

The formation of interstrand crosslinks in the DNA of
cis-diamminedichloroplatinum(II) (cisplatin)-treated Chinese hamster cells has
been demonstrated by three independent, highly sensitive techniques: namely those
of alkaline elution, renaturation of crosslinked DNA and alkaline sucrose
gradient velocity sedimentation. Simultaneous measurement of DNA break frequency 
by the first two methods and a computer model combined with the third enabled the
calculation of crosslink frequency after application of low doses of cisplatin.
Good agreement was found between the values obtained by the three methods used
here, and also with those obtained by direct measurement of the amount of
crosslinked hybrid DNA in density-labelled cells treated with higher doses of
cis-platin (Roberts, J.J. and Friedlos, F. (1981) Biochim. Biophys, Acta 655,
146--151). When measured by all three methods described here, crosslinking was
found to increase during several hours after treatment and then to decrease with 
a half-life of between 12 and 24 h. For low initial levels of crosslinking, this 
was largely attributed to an excision repair process, since the formation of
breaks in DNA was only minimal.

DOI: 10.1016/0005-2787(81)90005-8 
PMID: 6169370  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Acta Pharmacol Toxicol (Copenh). 1981 Apr;48(4):300-10.

Effect of D-penicillamine on collagen, glycosaminoglycans, DNA and RNA of
granulation tissue and connective tissue of skin, bone and aorta in rats.

Junker P, Helin G, Lorenzen I.

Granulation tissue was produced by subcutaneous implantation of viscose-cellulose
sponges on rats. The effect of D-penicillamine 500 mg/kg/day for 10 days on
granulation tissue and the connective tissue of skin, bone and aorta was studied 
ny comparison of treated animals with operated and unoperated controls. In
addition, the effect of sponge implantation on intact tissues was studied by
comparison between the control groups. The amount of granulation tissue was not
affected by D-penicillamine, and the granulomas-DNA content even increased.
D-penicillamine increased the amount of salt soluble collagen in all tissues
consistent with an inhibition of collagen crosslinking as reflected by increased 
aldehyde content and alpha/beta chain ratio in soluble skin collagen. Skin
appeared to be most sensitive. The content of free hydroxyproline and RNA and the
RNA/DNA ratio in skin decreased suggesting a decreased collagen biosynthesis. The
hydroxylation of proline and lysine was not affected by the treatment. The water 
percentage of aorta increased during D-penicillamine treatment, and the
35S-sulphate uptake in the sulphated glycosaminoglycans was stimulated in all
tissues, in granulation tissue mainly in the chondroitin-4/6-sulphate fraction.
No quantitative glycosaminoglycan changes occurred in granulation tissue. Sponge 
implantation caused an increase in the amount of salt soluble skin collagen
without any change in alpha/beta chain ratio and aldehyde content of purified,
soluble collagen. D-penicillamine plus operation reduced the collagen content of 
aorta. The effects of D-penicillamine on connective tissue compounds may be of
importance for its antirheumatic efficacy, but the accompanying effect on normal 
tissues may imply side effects.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0773.1981.tb01625.x 
PMID: 7336947  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Nucleic Acids Res. 1980 Dec 11;8(23):5895-912.

DNA strand specificity in promoter recognition by RNA polymerase.

Park CS, Hillel Z, Wu CW.

DNA strand and enzyme subunit specificities involved in the interaction between
E. coli RNA polymerase and T7 DNA were studied by photo-crosslinking techniques. 
In non-specific enzyme-DNA complexes, subunits, sigma, beta, and beta' were
crosslinked to both strands of the DNA. Under conditions leading to specific
enzyme-promoter complexes, however, only sigma and beta subunits were
crosslinked. The sigma subunit was crosslinked preferentially to the non-sense
strand at promoter sites. No such strand specificity was observed for the beta
subunit. These results provide insight into the molecular mechanism of promoter
recognition and indicate that the interaction between RNA polymerase and DNA
template is different at promoters and at non-specific sites.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/8.23.5895 
PMCID: PMC324349
PMID: 7008032  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Mol Biol. 1980 Feb 5;136(4):395-416.

Chromatin structure of the ribosomal RNA genes of Tetrahymena thermophila as
analyzed by trimethylpsoralen crosslinking in vivo.

Cech TR, Karrer KM.

DOI: 10.1016/0022-2836(80)90397-6 
PMID: 7365791  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1979 Dec 17;565(2):356-64.

Chromatin condensation. Possible dehydrating and stabilizing factors.

Jerzmanowski A, Staroń K, Tyniec-Kroenke B, Toczko K.

The effect of Na+, Mg2+, spermidine and spermine on the dehydration of chromatin 
gel and precipitation of soluble chromatin has been compared. Considerable
differences have been found in the relative ratios within the studied group (Na+,
Mg2+, spermidine and spermine) between the ability to dehydrate (1 : 32 : 53 :
67) and to precipitate (1 : 53 : 800 : 2000) chromatin. On the basis of the
dependence of precipitation on initial chromatin concentration it has been
suggested that the observed effect as contributed considerably by interparticle
aggregation is a relatively good measure of the ability of cation to stabilize
higher order structures of chromatin through direct crosslinking or induction of 
hydrophobic associations at selected sites. In contrary to that the method
estimating the direct dehydration measures the overall dehydrating effect of a
cation exerted on the whole chromatin. It has been suggested on the basis of the 
above comparative data that the in vivo regulation of the degree of overall
chromatin hydration should occur through changes in concentration of free small
inorganic cations. Larger organic polycations like polyamines should be mainly
involved in stabilization of the higher order chromatin structures. The
stabilizing role of large polyanions like RNA has been ruled out. It has also
been found that the unwinding of chromatin DNA results in considerable chromatin 
hydration.

DOI: 10.1016/0005-2787(79)90211-9 
PMID: 518886  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1979 Nov 28;91(2):554-62.

Stabilization of R loop structures by photochemical crosslinking with
4,5',8-trimethylpsoralen: application to gene enrichment and molecular cloning.

Wittig B, Wittig S.

DOI: 10.1016/0006-291x(79)91558-4 
PMID: 518654  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Theor Biol. 1979 May 7;78(1):61-75.

Sequence-specific crosslinking agents for nucleic acids: design and functional
group testing.

Summerton J.

DOI: 10.1016/0022-5193(79)90326-6 
PMID: 491709  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Mol Biol. 1978 Jun 25;122(2):145-62.

Sequence-specific crosslinking agents for nucleic acids. Use of
6-bromo-5,5-dimethoxyhexanohydrazide for crosslinking cytidine to guanosine and
crosslinking RNA to complementary sequences of DNA.

Summerton J, Bartlett PA.

DOI: 10.1016/0022-2836(78)90032-3 
PMID: 682188  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Nucleic Acids Res. 1978 Jun;5(6):1845-62.

Subunit topography of RNA polymerase (E. coli) in the complex with DNA.

Okada M, Vergne J, Brahms J.

E. Coli RNA polymerase binding to different DNAs (from E. Coli,
5-bromodeoxyuridine (BrdUrd) substituted DNA and poly [d(BrU-A)] was induced with
ultraviolet (U.V.) light to form protein-DNA crosslinked complexes. Two
independent methods of analysis, polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis in SDS and
chloroform extraction indicated the formation of a stable complex between the
enzyme and DNA. The complexes were formed under different ionic strength
conditions, at low enzyme to DNA ratios in order to approach the conditions of
specific binding. In contrast there was no crosslinking of the complex in 1 M KCl
solution which dissociates the enzyme from DNA. The efficiency of formation of
strongly bound complex was found to be much higher with holoenzyme than with core
enzyme. The following results were obtained : 1) The large subunits beta and
beta' were found to be bound to DNA. 2) Relatively small amount of sigma subunit 
were bound to DNA while alpha subunits were essentially not attached to DNA. The 
high binding affinity of beta and beta' subunits was also observed in the studies
of isolated subunits. These results lead to a model of enzyme-DNA complex in
which the large beta and beta' subunits provide the contacts between the RNA
polymerase and the DNA.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/5.6.1845 
PMCID: PMC342129
PMID: 353732  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Nucleic Acids Res. 1978 Apr;5(4):1429-41.

Photochemical crosslinking of transcription complexes with psoralen. I. Covalent 
attachment of in vitro SV40 nascent RNA to its double-stranded DNA template.

Shen CK, Hearst JE.

14C-labeled SV40 DNA has been transcribed with E. coli RNA polymerase using
3H-labeled ribonucleotide triphosphates as precursors. The resulting
transcription complexes were then photochemically crosslinked with the psoralen
derivative, 4'-aminomethyl-4,5', 8-trimethylpsoralen (AMT), at 37 degrees C and
analyzed in SDS-sucrose gradients. It was found that the photochemical
crosslinking procedure caused the nascent RNA chains to co-sediment with their
double-stranded (helical) SV40 templates in the denaturing sucrose gradient. This
result and several control experiments suggest that covalent linkages have formed
between nascent RNA and helical DNA after the photochemical reaction. The
crosslinking phenomenon was observed to be independent of the superhelical state 
of the DNA used as the template. Prior addition of EDTA to stop the transcription
is not required for successful crosslinkage.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/5.4.1429 
PMCID: PMC342089
PMID: 206876  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Eur J Biochem. 1977 Nov 15;81(1):79-90.

Physico-chemical properties of a DNA binding protein: Escherichia coli factor H1.

Spassky A, Buc HC.

H1 factor is a heat-stable protein found in large amounts in Escherichia coli. In
vitro, this protein has been found to stimulate transcription of lambda templates
by E. coli DNA-dependent RNA polymerase. The subunit molecular weight of this
factor has been re-estimated and found to be 15500 +/- 1000 in the presence of
2-mercaptoethanol. Crosslinking experiments performed with dimethylsuberimidate
in the presence or absence of the DNA template indicate the presence of multiples
of the 15500-Mr subunit up to the tetramer, the dimeric species being
predominant. One cysteinyl residue per 15000-Mr subunit is labeled by
4-chloro-7-nitrobenzofurazan. This residue is not labeled if the factor is
exposed to oxidizing conditions. In this case, three lysyl residues are titrated.
H1 factor behaves as a DNA-binding protein. We have detected binding to DNA by
two independent methods: displacement of a fluorescently labeled factor by the
native protein and retention of radioactive DNA on millipore filters in the
presence of the factor. Under our experimental conditions (high ionic strength,
absence of magnesium ions), the saturation function of lambda plac DNA as well as
of wild-type lambda DNA has been found to be non-cooperative. Saturation is
reached when 300 +/- 30 molecules of dimeric factor are bound per lambda
molecule, the average dissociation constant of the complex being 10nM. The
dissociation time of the H1.DNA complex is less than 5 s at 37 degrees C. The
binding of this factor lowers the affinity of native DNA for ethidium bromide. In
the presence of this intercalating dye, the solubility of the complex decreases
drastically.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1977.tb11929.x 
PMID: 338303  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1977 Sep 6;478(1):33-43.

Interactions of some nitro-derivatives of substituted 9-aminoacridine with DNA.

Filipski J, Marczyński B, Sadzińska L, Chalupka G, Chorazy M.

The mechanism of the biological activity of the 1-nitro and 2-nitro aminoacridine
derivatives containing the dimethylaminopropyl side chain was studied. RNA
synthesis in the isolated rat liver nuclei was only slightly influenced by both
compounds. They do not differ in their ability to form an intercalative complex
with DNA. Only the 1-nitro derivative exhibited strong inhibitory effect on RNA
biosynthesis and caused distinct ultrastructural changes (nucleolar segregation, 
chromatine margination etc.) in a living cell. The 1-nitro derivative binds
covalently to DNA in vivo resulting in crosslink formation. It is concluded that 
the biological activity of 1-nitro acridine derivatives depends more on their
crosslinking activity than on their ability to intercalate into DNA.

DOI: 10.1016/0005-2787(77)90241-6 
PMID: 196646  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1977 Apr;74(4):1363-7.

Mapping of sequences with 2-fold symmetry on the simian virus 40 genome: a
photochemical crosslinking approach.

Shen CK, Hearst JE.

Sequences with 2-fold axes of symmetry have been detected and mapped on the
simian virus 40 (SV40) genome by their ability to form hairpin turns in
single-stranded SV40 DNA. Supercoiled SV40 DNA (SV40 I) was digested with
restriction enzymes EcoRI and HpaII. The resulting linear DNA molecules with
lengths of the complete SV40 genome were then denatured and photochemically
reacted with 4,5',8-trimethylpsoralen (trioxsalen) at 16.0 +/- 0.5 degrees and
different ionic strengths. Secondary structures on the single-stranded SV40 DNA
were crosslinked and their positions analyzed by electron microscopy. There were 
no observable hairpin turns on the denatured SV40 DNA when it was photoreacted in
1 mM Tris-HCl/0.1 mM EDTA at pH 7.0. In 20 mM NaCl, one specific hairpin turn was
detected at 0.17 +/- 0.02 map units on the map of EcoRI-digested SV40 DNA, where 
the 3' ends of early 19S mRNA, late 19S mRNA, and 16S mRNA of SV40 have been
mapped. In 30 mM NaCl there are five more major hairpin turns besides the most
stable one. The centers of four of these specific hairpin turns were mapped at
0.26 +/- 0.02, 0.68 +/- 0.03, 0.84 +/- 0.02, and 0.94 +/- 0.01 units on the map
of EcoRI-digested SV40. The fifth one is at or near the unique EcoRI cleavage
site on SV40 DNA. The possible functions of these sequences are discussed in
terms of the nature of the promoter sites, the replication origin, the processing
of RNA precursors, and regulation at the translational level.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.74.4.1363 
PMCID: PMC430759
PMID: 193097  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Adv Exp Med Biol. 1977;86A:633-40.

Crosslinking of nucleic acids and proteins by bisulfite.

Shapiro R, Gazit A.

Sodium bisulfite is a food and beverage additive. It is also a salt of the urban 
air pollutant, sulfur dioxide. Bisulfite catalyzes, at neutral pH and
physiological temperatures, the transamination reactions of cytosine derivatives 
with amines. The products of the reactions are N4-substituted cytosines. Both the
alpha and epsilon-amino groups of L-lysine react with cytosine, and its
nucleosides, in the presence of bisulfite. Bisulfite catalyzes the binding of
cytosine to polylysine, lysine to polycytidylic acid, and polysine to
polycytidylic acid. Polylysine crosslinks with heat-denatured, but not native,
calf thymus DNA, in the presence of bisulfite. Other workers have demonstrated
crosslinking of viral RNA with maturation and coat protein, after treatment of
bacteriophage MS2 with bisulfite. Nucleic acid-protein crosslinking reactions may
contribute to the adverse effects of sulfur dioxide and bisulfite upon health.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4684-3282-4_37 
PMID: 920510  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Hoppe Seylers Z Physiol Chem. 1977 Jan;358(1):137-9.

The use of 2-iminothiolane as a protein crosslinking reagent.

Schramm HJ, Dülffer T.


PMID: 838467  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1976 Aug;73(8):2644-8.

Electron microscopy of DNA crosslinked with trimethylpsoralen: test of the
secondary structure of eukaryotic inverted repeat sequences.

Cech TR, Pardue ML.

It has been suggested that inverted repeat (palindrome) sequences, which are
widespread in eukaryotic genomes, exist in two alternate configurations, a linear
form and a cruciform. To investigate the relative frequency of these forms, the
DNA of intact mouse tissue culture cells was covalently crosslinked with
4,5',8-trimethylpsoralen (me3-psoralen) in order to prevent rearrangement of the 
DNA secondary structure during DNA isolation. The distribution of me3-psoralen
crosslinks was determined by electron microscopy after denaturation of the DNA in
the presence of glyoxal. Because of the high frequency and the relatively uniform
distribution of the me3-psoralen crosslinks, it could be concluded that almost
all of the inverted repeat sequences had been crosslinked. In spite of this, no
significant number of cruciforms was detected by electron microscopy. To
determine whether the me3-psoralen might itself be disrupting cruciform
structures, cruciforms were first produced in isolated Tetrahymena rDNA by heat
treatment and then crosslinked in vitro. The crosslinking was found to stabilize 
rather than disrupt these cruciforms. We conclude that the inverted repeat
sequences of the mouse tissue culture cells we tested are predominantly in linear
forms rather than in cruciform structures inside the cell.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.73.8.2644 
PMCID: PMC430704
PMID: 1066674  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Microbios. 1976;17(68-69):93-131.

Effect of chemical modification by (di)imidoesters on cells and cell envelope
components of Escherichia coli and Salmonella typhimurium.

Schmalreck AF, Teuber M.

Cells and cell envelope components of Escherichia coli and Salmonella typhimurium
were treated with mono- and bifunctional imidates like methylbutyrimidate,
methyl-4-mercaptobutyrimidate and dimethylsuberimidate, and after determination
of the appropriate conditions, the effects on structure and function were
investigated. Within 10 min after treatment of the bacteria with 5 mM of the
(di)imidoesters, active transport, DNA-, RNA-, protein- and lipid-synthesis were 
severely inhibited. After crosslinking, cell envelope components, e.g.
phospholipids, lipopolysaccharide, and periplasmic proteins, became partly
inextractable. Crosslinked cells showed increased resistance to ultrasonic
treatment and osmotic or detergent induced lysis. By the reaction of
(di)imidoesters with phospholipids containing no amino groups, it could be
demonstrated that non-amidine products were also formed. In addition,
freeze-fracturing and freeze-etching demonstrated distinct crosslinked areas in
the cell envelope of E. coli B.


PMID: 801370  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Cancer Chemother Rep. 1975 May-Jun;59(3):611-20.

Interaction of Rhodium(II) carboxylates with molecules of biologic importance.

Bear JL, Gray HB Jr, Rainen L, Chang IM, Howard R, Serio G, Kimball AP.

Rhodium(II) acetate, propionate, and butyrate showed a considerable variation in 
their antitumor activity against Ehrlich ascites tumor cells in mice, with the
butyrate complex being the most active. The three complexes markedly inhibited
DNA synthesis of Ehrlich ascites tumor cells in vivo. Rhodium (II) butyrate was
the most potent inhibitor followed by the propionate complex. One hour after
administration, rhodium(II) propionate and butyrate induce more uridine-5-3H
incorporation into RNA than is seen in the controls. Equilibrium dialysis studied
showed that rhodium(II) acetate-1-14C binds to single stranded DNA, poly-A,
ribonuclease A, and bovine serum albumin but not to highly polymerized native
calf thymus DNA, poly-G, or poly-C. In these cases binding occurred at the two
axial positions of rhodium(II) acetate to a nitrogen donor in the ligands. The
formation constants of the rhodium(II) acetate and propionate complexes with
5'-adenosine monophosphate were determined. The rhodium(II) propionate complex
was more stable. Sedimentation and viscosity measurements of poly-A and
poly-A/rhodium(II) acetate complexes indicate a high degree of intramolecular
crosslinking in the rhodium(II) acetate/poly-A complex. The rhodium(II)
carboxylate complexes were also found to be potent inhibitors of purified DNA
polymerase I and RNA polymerase from Escherichia coli.


PMID: 1106839  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

